
THE MOLECULAR CONSEQUNCES OF VITAMIN B12 DEPRIVATION IN THE POLAR DIATOM, FRAGILARIOPSIS CYLINDRUS



by




Catalina Maria Albury



Submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements
for the degree of Masters of Science


at


Dalhousie University
Halifax, Nova Scotia
March 2022



Dalhousie University is located in Mi'kma'ki, the ancestral and unceded territory of the Mi'kmaq. We are all Treaty people.







© Copyright by Catalina Albury, 2022
 
Dedication
For my ancestors. For my ancestors’ ancestors. 
For the Galicians who unfurled their sails on the mountainous Iberian coast.
For the West African diaspora who were trafficked shoulder to shoulder across the Atlantic with rice sewn into their braids.
For the Colombian inhabitants of the walled city overlooking the Caribbean Sea. 
For the Bahamian people that made a livelihood on the archipelago’s jagged islands, weathering hurricanes and plucking pink conch shells from the seafloor like jewels.  
The ocean is intertwined with our lives, losses, triumphs, and travels. The same water that flows through them flows through me, just as it flows through the smallest living beings that sustain our world. 

Por mis ancestros. Por los ancestros de mis ancestros. 
Pos los Gallegos quien desplegaron sus velas en la costa montañosa de Iberia.
Por la diáspora Africana occidental quien fueron traficados hombro a hombre por el océano Atlántico con arroz sembrado en sus trenzas.
Por los Costeños de la cuidad amurallada con vista al Mar Caribe. 
Por la gente Bahameña quien hizo un sustento en las islas dentadas del archipiélago, aguantando huracanes y desprendiendo conchas rosadas del fondo marino como joyas. 
El océano es entrelazado con nuestras vidas, perdidas, triunfos, y viajes.  La misma agua que fluye a través de ellos fluye por me, al igual que fluye por los seres vivos mas pequeños que sostienen nuestro mundo. 
 
Table of Contents
Dedication	ii
List of Tables	v
List of Figures	vi
Abstract	ix
List of Abbreviations	x
Acknowledgments	xii
Chapter I: Introduction	1
1.1 Trace Nutrient Limitation in the Ocean -	1
1.2. Vitamin B12: The History, Sources, and Sinks of an Enigmatic Metalloenzyme	3
1.3 Vitamin B12 Utilization in Eukaryotic Microalgae	5
1.4 Vitamin B12 in a Southern Ocean Context	6
1.5 Thesis Overview	6
Chapter II: Complex Proteomic Rearrangements in Response to Vitamin B12 Deprivation and Heat Stress in the Polar Diatom, Fragilariopsis cylindrus	9
2.1 Abstract	9
2.2 Introduction	10
2.3 Materials and Methods	14
2.3.1 Semicontinous Culturing	14
2.3.2 Sample Preparation for Proteomic Analyses	16
2.3.3 Targeted Proteomic Analysis	17
2.3.4 Global Proteomic Analysis via Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT)	18
2.3.5 TMT Data Analysis	19
2.4 Results	21
2.4.1 Growth Parameters	21
2.4.2 Methionine Synthase Concentrations	23
2.4.3 Proteomic Discovery Experiment	24
2.4.4 Proteomic Responses to B12 Deprivation	27
2.4.5 Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperatures	29
2.4.6 Interactive Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperatures and B12 Deprivation	31
2.5 Discussion	35
2.5.1 B12-Mediated Heat Resistance	35
2.5.2 Proteomic Responses to B12 Deprivation	36
2.5.3 Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperature	41
2.5.4 Interactive Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperature and B12 Deprivation	44
2.5.5 Conclusions	45
Chapter III: The Effects of Vitamin B12 Deprivation on Physiology and Metabolite Production of the Polar Diatom, Fragilariopsis cylindrus	47
3.1 Abstract	47
3.2 Introduction	48
3.3 Methods	54
3.3.1 Semicontinous Culturing	54
3.3.2 Cell Size Estimation	54
3.3.3 Quantification of Particulate Carbon and Nitrogen	55
3.3.4 Sample Preparation for Targeted Protein Analyses	55
3.3.5 Targeted Proteomic Analysis	56
3.3.6 Metabolite Sample Preparation	56
3.3.7 Sample Preparation for Targeted Metabolite Analyses	57
3.3.8 Metabolite Data Analysis	58
3.4 Results	60
3.4.1 Physiological Measurements	60
3.4.2 Methionine Synthase Concentrations	63
3.4.3 Metabolite Measurements	63
3.5 Discussion	68
3.5.1 Physiological parameters	68
3.5.2 Methionine Synthase Measurements	68
3.5.3 Cobalamin quotas	70
3.5.4 Other Metabolic Effects	72
3.5.5 Conclusions	73
Chapter IV: Conclusions	75
Overview	75
Recommended Future Works	75
Implications & Significance	77
Sources Cited	78
Supporting Information	86

 
List of Tables
Table 2.1	Mean growth rates (µ; d-1) of the last 10 dilutions of F. cylindrus cultures with and without the addition of exogenous B12 before temperature treatment……………22

Table 2.2	Literature comparisons of the proteome fraction of differentially expressed proteins after exposure to elevated temperature.....….………………………………..…...42

Table 3.1	Physiological parameters (growth rates, carbon and nitrogen quotas, estimated diameter, total cellular protein content, total cellular cobalamin quotas, extended Redfield ratios, and cellular B12:MetH ratios) of F. cylindrus cells grown at 6 °C with and without the addition of exogenous B12…………………………......….…………………...61

Table S2.1	Wash steps for in-gel protein digestion procedure……..…………………89

Table S2.2	Details of peptides analyzed for targeted proteomic analysis……...……..90

Table S2.3	Matrix of sample and pool labeling for tandem mass tagging (TMT) workflow…..…………..…………..…………..…………..…………..…………..……....91

Table S2.4	Table demonstrating how the removal of treatments affects protein quantification yield after IRS normalization in the TMT experiment on F. cylindrus biomass 24 hours after exposure to high temperature treatment………..………………..…...……...91

Table S2.5	List of proteins differentially expressed in response to B12 deprivation in F. cylindrus.…...….………….....….………….....….………….....…… …..…...…………...93

Table S2.6	List of proteins differentially expressed after 24 hours of exposure to an elevated temperature treatment (12 °C) in F. cylindrus……………...……………...……..95

Table S2.7	List of proteins differentially expressed after 24 hours of exposure to both the elevated temperature treatment (12 °C) and B12 deprivation in F. cylindrus. …………98

Table S3.1	List of monitored metabolite transitions……………...…………………110

Table S3.2	Fold changes of metabolites that were above detection limit in B12 replete and deplete cultures of F. cylindrus………..…………………...…………….……...…….113

 
List of Figures
Figure 2.1	Cell densities and photosynthetic efficiency responses over time of F. cylindrus to change in temperature, with and without the addition of exogenous B12………23 

Figure 2.2	Protein measurements from F. cylindrus cultures 24 hours after exposure to control (4 °C) and elevated (12 °C) temperature treatments, with and without the addition of exogenous B12. ………………………………………………...…………………………..24

Figure 2.3	Venn Diagram of the number differentially expressed proteins in F. cylindrus compared to the control treatment (4 °C, + B12) in samples harvested 24 hours after temperature treatment. ……………………………………………….....…………………25

Figure 2.4	Total functional assignments for differentially expressed (p < 0.05) proteins that have available KEGG annotations for the 3 pairwise comparisons, representing proteins that are differentially expressed in response to B12 deprivation, elevated temperature, and the combined effects of the to B12 deprivation and elevated temperature. …………………………………………………………………………………..………...26

Figure 2.5	Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus with a log2 mean spectral abundance more than 10.5 and p < 0.01 from any pairwise comparisons between the control (4 °C, +B12) representing the response to B12 deprivation (control vs. 4 °C, -B12); the response to elevated temperature treatment (control vs. 12 °C, + B12); and the response between the two stressors (control vs. 12 °C, -B12)..……………………………………………………………………………………….27

Figure 2.6	Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus representing the response to B12 deprivation (control vs. 4 °C, -B12).……….….28

Figure 2.7	Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus representing the response to elevated temperature (control vs. 12 °C, +B12). ……30

Figure 2.8	Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus representing the interactive response to B12 deprivation and elevated temperature (control vs. 12 °C, -B12) ……………………………………….………………………….33

Figure 2.9	Log2 mean abundance and log2 fold change of proteins differentially expressed in response to B12 deprivation, elevated temperature, and combined B12 deprivation and elevated temperature (p < 0.05) in F. cylindrus.………………..……….34

Figure 2.10	Illustration demonstrating the differential expression of proteins in the methionine cycle and related processes.………….………………………………………..44

Figure 3.1	Illustration of the chemical structure of four possible structural variants of vitamin B12 based on the nature of the lower (β) ligand. ……………….…………………50
Figure 3.2	Fluorescence measurements from semicontinuous dilutions of axenic F. cylindrus cultures with and without the addition of exogenous B12..………………………60

Figure 3.3	Particulate carbon and nitrogen measurements from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C with and without the addition of exogenous B12..…………………….……62

Figure 3.4	Estimated cell diameter and cell biovolume from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12….……………….…….….62

Figure 3.5	Total cellular protein content (µg cell-1) and femtomoles of diagnostic MetH and MetE peptides in F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12. …………….………………..……….……………….……………….…...63

Figure 3.6	B12 quotas from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12. ……………………………………………………..…….……65

Figure 3.7	Measurements of GBT and DMSP from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6° C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12..….…………………….……….……66

Figure 3.8	Attomoles of SAH (S-Adenosyl Homocysteine) and SAM (S-Adenosyl Methionine) cell-1 and ratio of cellular SAH:SAM content in F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12…………………………….………67

Figure 3.9	Normalized peak area of Vitamin B1 (thiamine) cell-1 and attomoles of cHET (5-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-methyl-1,3-thiazole-2-carboxylic acid) cell-1 in F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12...…………….…68

Figure 3.10	Bulk protein measurements (femtomoles µg total protein-1) of diagnostic MetH and MetE peptides in F. cylindrus, compared to measurements from P. tricornutum and environmental samples collected in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica in Bertrand et al., 2013.……….………………………………………………………………………....……71

Figure S2.1	Fluorescence measurements and cell counts of a single culture of F. cylindrus throughout an entire growth cycle………...…...…………………………….…..86

Figure S2.2	Boxplot of F. cylindrus cell densities over time after exposure to temperature treatments, estimated from chlorophyll-a fluorescence....….…………………87

Figure S2.3	Plots showing the effects of each normalization step for protein data collected from the TMT discovery experiment...……………...…………..…………....…88

Figure S2.4	Principal component analysis of all normalized proteins observed in a TMT experiment with biomass from F. cylindrus cultures with and without the addition of exogenous B12 24 hours after exposure to temperature treatments. ....………………..……92

Fig. S3.1	A comparison of growth rates (µ; d-1) between preliminary experiments conducted for this dissertation and other published values. ………………………………108

Figure S3.2	Data used to determine cell densities corresponding to late exponential growth phase in F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C with and without the addition of exogenous B12……………………………………………………………………..…...…108

Figure S3.3	Calibration curve for cell size estimation in F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C with and without the addition of exogenous B12. ..…………………………..…...…109

Figure S3.4	The effects of different normalizations on the coefficient of variation (CV) among quality control (QC) samples injected periodically during the metabolite analysis run…..…………..……………………………………………………...……………....…111

Figure S3.5	The effects of chosen normalizations with BMIS (best matched internal standard) on the coefficient of variation among quality control (QC) samples injected periodically between samples during the metabolite analysis of in F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C with and without the addition of exogenous B12………………………..…111

Figure S3.6	Calibration curves used to quantify metabolites of interested in F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C with and without the addition of exogenous B12…………………112

Figure S3.7	The normalized spectral abundance of cobalamin compounds in three technical replicates (purple, orange, yellow), of three biological replicates (a-f) per B12 treatment (+ or -) for F. cylindrus cultures grown with and without the addition of exogenous B12.…..…………………..…………………..……………………………….………..….114











Abstract
Fragilariopsis cylindrus is an ecologically significant diatom inhabiting sea ice and water column assemblages in the Southern Ocean (SO). Microbial growth in SO microbial communities has been demonstrated to be periodically limited or co-limited by vitamin B12. In this dissertation, I examine the molecular consequences of B12 deprivation in F. cylindrus, with a focus on alterations to protein expression and metabolite production. Despite unchanged growth rates, B12-deprived F. cylindrus cells display responses that can impact the production of growth stimulating compounds, including induction of a putative B12 remodeling pathway and differential production of DMSP and thiamine related compounds. My findings highlight that assessments of marine phytoplankton’s responses to stressors beyond growth rate should be considered in order to generate accurate predictions of community interactions in micronutrient deprived environments. These results have implications for our understanding the relationship between B12 availability and community composition and nutrient cycling in a changing ocean. 
















List of Abbreviations
Ado-B12: Adenosylcobalamin
AHCase: Adenosylhomocysteinase
APS: Ammonium persulfate
ATP: Adenosine 5'-triphosphate
B1: Vitamin B1; Thiamin
B12: Vitamin B12; Cobalamin
B2: Vitamin B2; Riboflavin
B7: Vitamin B7; Biotin
BLAST: Basic Local Alignment Search Tool
BMIS: Best Matched Internal Standard
CBA1: Cobalamin Acquisition Protein 1
CN-B12: Cyanocobalamin
Chl-D: Mg-chelatase subunit D
CobN: Aerobic cobaltochelatase subunit N
CobS: Aerobic cobaltochelatase subunit S
CobT: Aerobic cobaltochelatase subunit T
CobW: Cobalamin biosynthesis protein W
cRAP: common Repository of Adventitious Proteins
cSHMT: cytosolic Serine Hydroxymethyltransferase
DAPI: 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole 
DE: Differentially Expressed
DMB: 5, 6-di-methylbenzimidazole
DMS: Dimethyl sulfide
DMSP: Dimethylsulfoniopropionate
DTT: 1,4-Dithiothreitol
FDR: False Discovery Rate
IRS: Internal Reference Scaling 
IRMS: Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer
JGI: Joint Genome Institute
KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
LC-MS: Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry
MCM: Methyl CoA Mutase
Me-B12: Methylcobalamin
METase: monohydroxyethyl terephthalate hydrolase
MetE: B12-independent methionine synthase
MetH: B12-dependant methionine synthase
MetK: S-adenosylmethionine synthase
MS: Mass spectrometer
MTHFR: Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase
MMT: methylthiohydroxybutryate methyltransferase
NCBI: National Center for Biotechnology Information
OH-B12: Hydroxycobalamin
PCA: Principal Component Analysis 
PBGS: Porphobilinogen Synthase
ChlD: protoporphyrin IX Mg-chelatase
PAM: Pulse-amplitude-modulated
QC: Quality Control
RFU: Relative Fluorescence Units
RNR: Ribonucleotide Reductase
SAH: S-Adenosyl Homocysteine 
SAM: S-Adenosyl Methionine
SO: Southern Ocean
TEMED: Tetramethylethylenediamine
THF: Tetrahydrofolate
5,10-MTHF: 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate
ThiC: Thiamine biosynthesis protein C
TMT: Tandem Mass Tagging
UROD: uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase
 
Acknowledgments 
I am grateful to have been a guest on Mi'kmaw land whilst completing the research included in this dissertation. I would like to thank my family, especially my abuela for sparking my curiosity for the natural world, my mother for insisting that I not take “no” for an answer, my father for modeling selfless devotion and empathy as tenets for a fulfilling life, and my sister for lending me her strength and leadership in times of need. I am grateful to my partner, Tor, and my closest friends, Zanib, Aaron, and Araminta, for keeping me grounded throughout the course of completing this degree.  I also have the extraordinary members of the Bertrand lab to thank for the input, support, and joy that they have provided during my 4 years as a lab member, from my time as an undergraduate student to today. This includes (in no particular order) Loay Jabre, Scott McCain, Cat Bannon, Gianpaolo Cardellini, Megan Roberts, Lena Beckley, and many others.  I’d like to extend my dearest thanks to Dr. Elden Rowland for providing his technical expertise on all things mass spectrometry. Elden is ever available to share a laugh or song, which were needed throughout this experience at times. Lastly, this dissertation would have never been completed without the lasting dedication, innovation, and insight of my supervisor, Dr. Erin Bertrand. Having the privilege to work with her has shaped my worldview immensely. I have her to thank for skilfully shaping my research, especially as she undertook the joys of becoming a new mother whilst guiding me through the final stretch of this journey.  
Chapter I: Introduction

1.1 Trace Nutrient Limitation in the Ocean – Marine phytoplankton are key players in the Earth’s carbon cycle. An estimated 46% of global net primary productivity originates from the ocean, most of which is conducted by phytoplankton (Field et al., 1998). In addition to forming the base of marine food webs, phytoplankton are responsible for export of carbon to the deep ocean, acting as a global sink for anthropogenic carbon dioxide inputs (Michaels & Silvers 1988). Abiotic factors such as light and nutrient availability are known to drive phytoplankton growth in the ocean (Pilson 2012).  Nutrients required in trace concentrations for microbial growth, also known as micronutrients, include metals and vitamins. These often utilized in the active sites of critical enzymes. For example, the trace metal iron is required in enzymes that are crucial to the electron transport chain, which creates the required redox potential required for the generation of ATP, the main currency of energy for the cell. Iron availability is also critical for the function of many of the components of the photosynthetic apparatus (Ferreira and Straus 1994).  Like iron, manganese is needed for photosynthetic processes as a core component of the oxygen-evolving complex of photosystem II (Yachandra et al., 1996). Additional trace metals that are important for phytoplankton growth include zinc, copper, and cobalt (Sunda & Hunstman 1998). Another important class of micronutrients are vitamins. The vitamins are a heterogenous group of compounds characterized by being required in small amounts for life and metabolic integrity in animals (Bender 2003). The three main vitamins understood to be required by eukaryotic microalgae for growth are thiamin (vitamin B1), cobalamin (vitamin B12), and biotin (vitamin B7) (Provasoli & Carlucci 1974). 
Despite their small requirements in the cell compared to macronutrients in the ocean, trace metals and vitamins can disproportionally affect the growth and structure of microbial communities. Liebig’s law of the minimum dictates that the nutrient that is in shortest supply relative to the cell’s need is that which will limit an organisms’ growth, and more widely, system productivity (de Baar 1994). This was expanded on by John Martin in the 1990’s, who noticed that there were vast regions of the ocean where macronutrients were abundant and yet not yielding the expected amount of life. He described these areas of ocean as HNLC’s (high nutrient; low chlorophyll areas), as at the time, chlorophyll was the chosen method for estimating phytoplankton biomass. Martin postulated the reason for this phenomenon and went on to discover that adding iron to seawater led to increased growth (Martin 1990; Martin et al., 1994). Martin later declared that if he was provided with “half a tanker of iron”, he could catalyze “an ice age” (Pilson 2012). Although the concept of utilizing iron additions to facilitate drawdown of carbon dioxide via increased growth is now understood to be far more nuanced, Martin’s bravado emphasizes the sheer magnitude of consequences of trace nutrient availability on global biogeochemical processes. More recent works have examined the nature of micronutrient limitation on microbial communities with revised approaches, broader scopes, and improved technology. We now understand that differential availability of micronutrients has the possibility to fuel or inhibit the growth of various members of microbial communities, leading to alterations in community composition and structure (Provasoli 1963; Sañudo-Wilhelmy et al., 2014). In particular, mounting evidence places vitamin B12 among important drivers of microbial ecology and biogeochemistry in the ocean, making its utilization and dynamics in significant species worthy of further examination. An estimated half of all phytoplankton species have absolute vitamin B12 requirements (Croft et al., 2005) and bottle incubation experiments have demonstrated that the addition of B12 to natural communities results in increased growth (Bertrand et al., 2007). The link between B12 availability and community-level effects on oceanic microbes has been explored by several studies, which have demonstrated that B12 availability can alter community composition, net productivity, and growth in a variety of marine environments (Sañudo-Wilhelmy et al., 2006; Gobler et al., 2017; Koch et al., 2011; Browning et al., 2017).  

1.2. Vitamin B12: The History, Sources, and Sinks of an Enigmatic Metalloenzyme –Vitamin B12 was initially discovered as an anemia-causing factor by two doctors, Minot and Murphy, in 1926. Later work demonstrated that vitamin B12 deprivation reduces methionine synthase activity in humans, leading to disruptions in nucleic acid biosynthesis (Shane & Stokstad 1985). As researchers worked towards maintaining alga in culture on synthetic media, the importance of vitamin B12 to growth and physiology emerged. Remarkably, Hutner, noticed that he could use liver concentrates normally used to treat patients suffering from pernicious anemia to maintain cultures of Euglena. In 1949, Hutner discovered that these extracts, in fact, contained vitamin B12, which was facilitating the growth of the cultures (Hutner et al., 1949). Later, as vitamin B12 was increasingly studied in oceanographic circles as a micronutrient required for phytoplankton growth, investigations into B12 requirements and utilization in microalgae became more common. Droop studied how the uptake of vitamin B12 availability affected growth in the haptophyte Monochrysis lutheri (now recognized as Pavlova lutheri). The results of his seminal work with vitamin B12 demonstrated that growth rate depended on intercellular quota of the vitamin, rather than its concentration in the media (Droop 1968), which was contradictory to the prevailing perspective at the time. Droop’s research established that intracellular vitamin B12 quotas correlate with growth rate, highlighting the coenzyme’s importance as a potential controlling factor to primary productivity in microalgae. Vitamin B12’s scarce concentrations in the ocean (picomolar to subpicomolar; Heal et al., 2014) support the notion that B12 may limit growth. Additionally, the cofactor is only produced biogenically by certain bacterial and archaeal groups (Raux et al., 2000). Yet, many eukaryotic microbes possess the genes for B12 biosynthesis despite not being able to produce the complete molecule de novo (Vancaester et al., 2020). 
Vitamin B12 is a remarkable molecule in that its biosynthesis is recognized as one of the most complex pathways known to humankind, utilizing a total of 30 enzyme-mediated steps. This process is reviewed in detail in Raux et al., 2000. The biosynthetic pathway begins with a shared precursor, the tetrapyrrole ring, that also goes on to produce heme and chlorophyll-a. In the centre of the ring for each of these molecules is a metal ion: iron, magnesium, and cobalt, in heme, chlorophyll-a, and cobalamin respectively.  In addition to the production of the ring, the lower ligand of the molecule must also be synthesized. In cobalamins, the lower ligand of the molecule is either DMB (5, 6-di-methylbenzimidazole) or adenine. Cobalamins with DMB as the lower ligand are readily utilized by B12-dependent microalgal consumers, but evidence shows that cobalamins with adenine (pseudocobalamins) are orders of magnitude less bioavailable for their use (Helliwell et al., 2016). Helliwell and colleagues have discovered that if DMB is provided to certain species along with pseudocobalamin, they are able to remodel the pseudocobalamin into cobalamin (Helliwell et al., 2016). The upper ligand also has a few possible modifications. Cobalamins with Ado-, CN-, OH-, and Me- groups as the upper ligand produce adenosyl-, cyano-, hydroxo- and methylcobalamin respectively. Cyanocobalamin is a product of the commercial synthesis of cobalamin (Obeid et al., 2015). Adenosyl- and methyl-cobalamin are the biologically active forms of cobalamin but are rapidly highly photolabile and degrade to hydroxocobalamin upon exposure to light. 

1.3 Vitamin B12 Utilization in Eukaryotic Microalgae – Vitamin B12 is required for growth by some photosynthetic eukaryotes for use as a cofactor in essential enzymes. The biologically active forms of cobalamin, adenosyl- and methylcobalamin, are utilized by eukaryotes as cofactors in MCM (methylmalonyl-CoA mutase) and the methionine synthase MetH, respectively. An alternate B12-independent methionine synthase enzyme, MetE, can also be used to synthesize methionine in some organisms (Banjaree & Matthews 1990). Out of the recognized B12-requiring enzymes in eukaryotes, MetH has been hypothesized to be the primary sink for B12 use, as MetE’s presence is correlated with a lack of an absolute B12 requirement for growth (Helliwell et al., 2011).  The requirement of B12 for growth, also known as B12 auxotrophy, has arisen many times throughout the evolutionary history of photosynthetic microbes via the loss of genes encoding the MetE enzyme (Helliwell et al., 2011). Notably, phytoplankton and land plants play the same trophic role as primary producers in their respective environments, yet land plants solely utilize MetE to produce methionine, and do not require exogenous B12. It has thereby been hypothesized that eukaryotic algae are faced with a high selective pressure to maintain the B12-dependent methionine synthase pathway (Bertrand et al., 2013; Bertrand & Allen 2012; Helliwell et al., 2011; Ellis et al., 2017). Our understanding of the dynamics between these two enzymes and the broader consequences of B12 limitation in biogeochemically significant regions of the ocean remains limited. 
1.4 Vitamin B12 in a Southern Ocean Context – The Southern Ocean (SO) is a biogeochemically significant region responsible for distributing nutrients to the global ocean (Sarmiento et al., 2004). The SO hosts some of the largest seasonal phytoplankton blooms in the world (Sallée J-B et al., 2015). Evidence suggests that B12 utilization and cycling have far-reaching consequences for SO microbial assemblages as vitamin B12 can limit or co-limit phytoplankton growth there (Bertrand et al., 2007). Ellis et al., 2017 found that, compared to diatoms in other waters, a much higher proportion of Antarctic diatoms are able to produce MetE, allowing them to utilize both the B12 dependent and independent pathways for methionine synthesis. One such diatom, Fragilariopsis cylindrus, is a major component of sea ice and water column assemblages in the SO (Kang & Fryxell 1992; Mock & Hoch 2005). This psychrophile has been described as an emerging model diatom species (Falciatore et al., 2020) and possesses the gene for production of MetE (Helliwell et al., 2011). MetE transcripts in F. cylindrus have been demonstrated to decrease in the presence of B12, but it exhibits no difference in growth rate due to vitamin starvation (Ellis et al., 2017). We chose to study the effects of vitamin B12 deprivation in SO diatoms using F. cylindrus for these experiments due to its ecological significance and sequenced genome (Mock et al., 2017). 
1.5 Thesis Overview – This dissertation aims to characterize the molecular consequences of vitamin B12 deprivation in an ecologically significant polar diatom. We tackle this question by investigating the proteome and metabolite production of axenic F. cylindrus cultures grown in the absence of vitamin B12. This dissertation aims to (1) explore the interaction between protein expression, vitamin B12, and elevated temperature and (2) characterize changes in production of potentially B12-dependent metabolites and physiology in response to B12 deprivation in F. cylindrus. 
In Chapter II, the interactive effects of B12 deprivation and heat stress on the proteome of F. cylindrus were examined. F. cylindrus was cultured with and without the addition of exogenous B12, and then exposed to an elevated temperature treatment. We measured the expression of the methionine synthases MetH and MetE and conducted a proteomic discovery experiment to identify proteins that were differentially expressed in response to the individual and combined stressors.  I designed and performed the culturing experiments with guidance from Dr. Erin Bertrand. I also performed cell count and photophysiological measurements and completed sample preparation for all protein measurements. Targeted and discovery protein samples were run on mass spectrometers in both the Bertrand lab and Dalhousie’s MS core facility by Dr. Elden Rowland based on methods developed with Dr. Bertrand. The database search for our discovery proteomics experiment was also conducted by Dr. Rowland. The remaining data analysis was performed by me, including normalization procedures and differential expression analyses. Dr. Bertrand provided guidance and feedback on the ideas presented in the chapter.  
Chapter III investigates the effects of vitamin B12 deprivation on diatom physiology and metabolite production, in addition to presenting the first direct measurements of cellular B12 quotas in F. cylindrus. We grew F. cylindrus cultures at an optimal growth temperature of 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12 and, using targeted metabolite quantification approaches, we monitored the abundance of cobalamin, in addition to a suite of metabolites previously shown to be affected by B12 deprivation in other organisms. For this chapter, I also designed and performed the culturing experiments with guidance from Dr. Erin Bertrand. I performed cell count, particulate carbon and nitrogen, and cell size measurements, in addition to preparing protein samples for quantitative measurements of MetE and MetH. Dr. Elden Rowland and I extracted the samples for metabolite measurements together. Dr. Rowland performed the mass spectrometry and I performed the analysis of the protein and metabolite data, including selecting best matched internal standards using methods with advice from Cat Bannon. Dr. Bertrand also provided guidance and feedback on the ideas presented in this chapter.  


 
Chapter II: Complex Proteomic Rearrangements in Response to Vitamin B12 Deprivation and Heat Stress in the Polar Diatom, Fragilariopsis cylindrus
2.1 Abstract
Vitamin B12 is a cobalt-containing micronutrient that periodically limits phytoplankton growth in the Southern Ocean (SO). B12 deprivation has been demonstrated to lead to metabolic consequences in diatoms, including methionine starvation and changes to osmolyte production. In this study, we examine the interactive effects of B12 deprivation and heat stress on the proteome of the ecologically significant SO diatom, Fragilariopsis cylindrus.  F. cylindrus was grown in B12-replete and B12-deplete conditions and exposed to supra-optimal (12 °C) and control (4 °C) temperatures. Targeted and global proteomic analyses were then used to identify the combined molecular consequences of the two stressors. We found that growth was unaffected by B12 availability at supra-optimal temperatures, despite complex proteomic rearrangements in response to the combined stressors. Amongst these rearrangements, we identify proteins that may be used to remodel fragments of B12. We also demonstrate that canonical B12 deprivation and elevated temperature responses persist at the intersection of the two stressors, suggesting that proteomic biomarkers used to survey B12 limitation in diatoms in-situ are reliable, even at lethal temperatures. The data provided in this study suggests that the physiological impacts of vitamin B12 in a non-auxotrophic diatom are multifaceted and complex, despite the absence of changes to growth rate. Additionally, F. cylindrus may increase the biologically labile B12 pool by remodelling fragments of B12, improving their ability to thrive in the Southern Ocean’s generally low B12 environment. The differential expression of proteins used to respond to B12 deprivation highlights the strong selective pressure that vitamin B12 imposes on Southern Ocean diatoms. 
 
2.2 Introduction
Fragiliariopsis cylindrus is an ecologically significant pennate diatom which inhabits the Southern Ocean (SO). This region shapes the Earth’s climate and biogeochemistry, supporting global primary productivity via the upwelling and circulation of nutrient-rich deep water to ocean basins (Sarmiento et al., 2004). The ecological and biogeochemical landscape of this ocean hub is driven by large-scale seasonal phytoplankton blooms (Sallée J-B et al., 2015). Controls on the composition and spatio-temporal extent and of these blooms are multifaceted, including both oceanographic conditions and biotic factors (Boyd 2002). The roles of B-vitamins have been increasingly explored as important regulators of blooms globally (Panzeca et al., 2008; Sañudo-Wilhelmy et al., 2006; Gobler et al., 2017; Koch et al., 2011; Bertrand et al., 2007; Browning et al., 2017). In the SO, bottle incubation experiments have found vitamin B12 to be limiting or colimiting to phytoplankton growth (Bertrand et al., 2007; Taylor et al., 2008; Bertrand et al., 2015), suggesting that it plays a significant role as a regulator of primary productivity in the region. However, the individual molecular responses to B12 deprivation and other relevant environmental variables in important SO species have not been explored in detail.
Vitamin B12 (also known as cobalamin) is a cobalt-containing micronutrient found in the ocean in picomolar concentrations (Heal et al., 2014; Suffridge et al., 2017). It is only synthesized by select prokaryotes (Raux et al., 2000) and tends to photodegrade upon exposure to UV light (Carlucci et al., 1969). The cofactor is rapidly consumed by phytoplankton and bacteria in the surface ocean (Heal et al., 2014). Vitamin B12 and its related cobamides are primarily required by photosynthetic eukaryotes for participation in methylation reactions and radical rearrangements (Bertrand & Allen 2012). In methylation reactions, methylcobalamin is used to catalyze the conversion of homocysteine and methyl-tetrahydrofolate into methionine, an essential amino acid and cellular source of methylation capacity, via the methionine synthase MetH. Additionally, some eukaryotes can also utilize an alternative methionine synthase, MetE, which is B12-independent (Banerjee and Matthews 1990). The absence of genes encoding the MetE enzyme in algal genomes has been linked to B12 auxotrophy, meaning that most organisms without the enzyme require the vitamin for survival (Helliwell et al., 2011). MetE has a slower turnover rate than MetH, making it a more energetically costly and resource intensive method of methionine production (Banerjee and Matthews 1990; Bertrand et al., 2013), which may be why MetE expression has been demonstrated to significantly decline in the presence of B12 in organisms that possess both enzymes (Croft et al., 2005; Bertrand et al., 2012). One such organism, Fragilariopsis cylindrus, is a major component of sea ice and pelagic seasonal ice zone assemblages at both poles (Kang & Fryxell 1992; Mock & Hoch 2005). Along with many other SO diatoms, F. cylindrus possesses genes to produce both methionine synthase enzymes (Ellis et al., 2017). The B12 deprivation responses of F. cylindrus have been explored via transcriptomic observation of methionine synthases, demonstrating that MetE transcripts are enriched in the absence of B12 (Ellis et al., 2017). Furthermore, genes for a cobalamin acquisition protein, CBA1, have also been identified in F. cylindrus (Bertrand et al., 2012), but otherwise its responses to B12 deprivation have gone largely unexplored, and no direct measurements of these B12 deprivation proteins have been conducted to date in F. cylindrus.
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic approaches, applied to phytoplankton cultures, allow us to observe which proteins are enriched or depleted in response to a treatment, providing information about the production of enzymes and other proteins that mitigate the effects of environmental stressors or respond to nutrient limitation.  Experiments like these have been common for some time now, but they rarely examine the interactive effects of environmentally relevant factors. Multiple stressors can lead to unexpected responses, impacting an organism differently than the sum of their individual effects (Folt et al., 1999). Whilst culture studies represent merely a simplification of an organisms’ possible function in its environment, designing experiments that account for combined stressors provides the opportunity for a more complete understanding of organisms’ responses to their dynamic environment. 
In previous work examining interactions between B12 availability and heat stress, Xie et al., 2013 found that the green alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, was particularly sensitive to combined B12 deprivation and increased temperature. C. reinhardtii was rescued from heat stress at lethal temperatures in the presence of B12-producing bacteria, or upon the addition of both exogenous B12 and methionine. This observation suggested that B12 use may confer heat stress tolerance in C. reinhardtii because of MetH’s possible enhanced resistance to high temperatures when compared to MetE (Xie et al., 2013). The prevalence of B12-mediated heat resistance in this green alga also implies that a reduction in methionine synthesis activity has negative consequences in the face of heat stress, suggesting that this reaction may serve as a metabolic bottleneck. Is it possible that methionine synthesis also acts as a bottleneck to growth at normally lethal temperatures in F. cylindrus? 
To tackle this question, we examined the effects of elevated temperature on F. cylindrus and how their mechanisms may affect the methionine synthase pathway. An in-depth analysis of F. cylindrus’ proteomic responses to elevated temperature has not been completed, but the transcriptomic effects of heat stress have been explored in Mock et al., 2017. Interestingly, Mock and colleagues found that the temperature response to 11 °C (described as an “elevated temperature treatment”) was much more subtle relative to the effects of darkness on the transcriptome. The molecular effects of supra-optimal temperatures in cold adapted organisms, also known as psychrophiles, are currently considered to reflect their cold-adapted states. There are two significant challenges to overcome for organisms to thrive in cold environments: decreased membrane fluidity and reduced reaction speeds (Feller 2013). Therefore, psychrophiles tend to upregulate proteins related to the synthesis of membrane components and osmolytes at cold temperatures (Collins & Margesin 2019). Psychrophiles are also known to modify their enzymes to increase specificity and binding or increase the quota of important proteins, such as those involved in photosynthesis and protein synthesis, in order to manage temperature-mediated decreases in reaction rates (Feller 2013). Increases in temperature past the temperature optima (Topt) of an organism can lead to the reversal of these acclimations (Liang et al., 2019). Given our lack of understanding related to how molecular responses to B12 deprivation vary with important environmental variables such as temperature in psychrophiles, we designed an experiment to explore the interactive effects of B12 deprivation and elevated temperature in F. cylindrus.  
We conducted multifactorial culturing of F. cylindrus, depriving these cultures of B12 and applying an elevated temperature treatment of 12 °C, the lowest temperature that proved to be lethal. These conditions were comparable to Xie et al., 2013’s study design, chosen to allow us to investigate whether this psychrophile displays the same B12-mediated heat stress response. It is important to note that we do not expect mean sea surface temperatures in the SO to reach 12 °C in coming centuries. However, micro-environments like meltwater pools have been shown to create extreme temperature environments, leading to significant impacts for Antarctic microbes like F. cylindrus (Sackett et al. 2013). As such, these conditions can be considered extreme, but with environmental relevance. Twenty-four hours after exposure, we measured methionine synthase concentrations and conducted a global proteomic analysis. We hypothesized that the combined molecular effects of B12 deprivation and heat stress in F. cylindrus would be synergistic rather than additive, leading to differences in protein expression in cultures exposed to both stressors not seen in cells treated with each stressor individually.  Upon completion of the experiment, we found that the expression of the B12-independent methionine synthase pathways in F. cylindrus persisted at lethal temperatures, unlike that of C. reinhardtii, where a decline in metE transcripts was observed (Xie et al., 2013). Furthermore, complex proteomic rearrangements occurred in response to the interactive effects of lethal temperatures and B12 deprivation, contrasting the responses to each stressor individually. It is critical to build a baseline understanding of how temperature can interactively affect the molecular consequences of important environmental variables such as vitamin B12 availability. Although no change in growth was observed in response to B12 availability, changes in protein expression demonstrated that F. cylindrus adopts varying strategies to deal with the combined stressors. 
2.3 Materials and Methods
2.3.1 Semicontinous Culturing - Axenic cultures of Fragilariopsis cylindrus (strain CCMP1102) were obtained from the Provasoli-Guillard National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota. The cells were inoculated into 250 mL vent-capped culture flasks and maintained with sterile techniques at 4 °C, with a saturating irradiance of approximately 100 μE m−2 s−1 in a 12:12 hour light-dark cycle. 4 °C was chosen as a relevant control temperature for the pelagic Southern Ocean environment (Sackett et al., 2013). Autoclaved SOW media (Sunda et al., 2005; Price et al., 1988/89) was used to prepare enriched f/2 medium (Guillard & Ryther 1962, Guillard 1975) to support the growth of the cultures. The linear relationship between fluorescence under our growth conditions and cell count was established with a Turner hand-held fluorometer and flow cytometer, respectively (Supporting Information Figure S2.1b,c). This preliminary culture was grown through exponential phase to determine which cell densities corresponded to early exponential growth (Supporting Information Figure S2.1a). Then, three biological replicates, both with and without the addition of 369 pM of vitamin B12 in the form of cyanocobalamin, were maintained at 4 °C and transferred every 48 hours to keep them within the range of RFU (Relative Fluorescence Units) corresponding with late exponential growth (between 60 and 120 RFU). This was done for approximately 3 months, as similar amounts of time have been utilized to acclimatize F. cylindrus to experimental conditions in previous experiments (Mock & Hock 2005, Petrou et al., 2012). During the experiment, cell counts were obtained with a BD Accuri C6 Flow Cytometer. The cultures were regularly monitored for bacterial contamination with microscopy and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) stain.
After the acclimation period, each replicate was split in two and exposed to two temperature treatments at 0 hours (Figure 2.1). The control cultures were maintained at 4 °C, and the other half were exposed to the elevated temperature treatment of 12 °C.  Subsequently, the cultures were sampled every 24 hours for a total of 72 hours. At each time point, each culture’s cell count was taken via flow cytometry and a measure of photosynthetic capacity, Fv/Fm, was measured with a  PAM (Pulse Amplitude Modulated) fluorometer (DUAL-PAM-100; Heinz Walz GmbH) after a 20-minute dark acclimation period on ice. A secondary trial with a 10 °C elevated temperature treatment was also conducted to confirm that 12 °C is the lowest lethal temperature for F. cylindrus cells (Supporting Information Figure S2.2b). Targeted and global proteomic measurements (described below) were made on biomass from cultures vacuum filtered onto 2.0 μm isopore membrane filters (Millipore) after 24 hours of exposure to their respective temperature treatments and stored at -80 °C.

2.3.2 Sample Preparation for Proteomic Analyses – Protein was extracted from filters in 0.75 mL of protein extraction buffer (0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH: 7.5, 5mM EDTA, 2% SDS) for 10 minutes at room temperature and then heated on a thermomixer for 15 minutes at 95 ° C and 350 RPM. Then, the filters were sonicated on ice for 1 minute at 50% amplitude (120 W, QSonica microprobe). They were then incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes, with vortexing every 10-15 minutes. The samples were centrifuged at 15,000XG for 30 minutes at 20 °C. The supernatant and debris-containing cell pellet were then separated. A Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) was used to determine protein concentration in the supernatant.
30 μg of protein was then digested with trypsin with an in-gel procedure modified from Kachuk et al., 2015. The protein solution was polymerized by making up the sample with 10 mM Tris to 100 μL. Then, 100 μL of 1 M Tris Buffer, 40% Acryl-Bis, TEMED was added to each sample, followed by 7 μL 1% APS. The samples were then incubated for 1 hour at 20 °C. 200 μL of gel fixing solution (10% acetic acid and 50% methanol in LC-MS water) was added and the samples were incubated at 20 °C for 30 minutes. Then, 1.6 mL gel fixing solution was added, followed by another 20 °C incubation overnight. The supernatant was discarded and 1 mL of milliQ water was added, and the samples were incubated once again at 20 °C and 350 RPM for 20 minutes. The resulting supernatant was then discarded, and each gel was cut into 8-12 pieces with a sterile blade in a glass petri dish. The gel slices were reduced, alkylated, and washed (Supporting Information, Table S2.1). The gels were rehydrated in trypsin (1:20 µg trypsin:µg protein) and suspended in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 2 hours on ice. Then, they were incubated at 37 °C for 20 minutes and covered in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 16 hours at 37 °C. Following digestion, samples were resuspended and acidified with 3.5μl formic acid on ice and desalted using 50 mg Strata C18-E (55 μm, 70 Å) SPE columns (Phenomonex) to remove any primary amines and then brought to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf). 

2.3.3 Targeted Proteomic Analysis – A Dionex Ult 3000 UPLC integrated to a TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer was used for targeted proteomic analysis. This instrument was equipped with a heated, low flow capillary ESI probe (HES-II). Settings were as follows: spray voltage 35000 V, sheath gas 0.5, auxillary gas 0.2, ion transition tube temperature of 325 °C, vapor gas to 70 °C. Chrom filter was set to 10 seconds. Stock solutions of heavy isotope labelled standards for MetE and MetH peptides were prepared in acetic acid, acetonitrile, and HPLC-grade water and added to each sample in concentrations to give 20 and 40 femtomoles of each peptide on column after injection (Bertrand et al., 2013). 0.3 µg of total protein was injected onto the column.  Peak areas and retention times were exported to and processed with Skyline. The details of peptides analyzed can be found in Supporting Information, Table S2.2.

2.3.4 Global Proteomic Analysis via Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) – The procedure for labeling and fractionating protein samples for TMT is adapted from Wu et al., 2019. The digested protein samples were resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) to give a protein concentration of 0.5 ug μL-1. A pool, which was used in internal reference channels, was made by combining 10 μL aliquots from each sample (one pool for each TMT experiment). 44 μL of each resuspended sample was transferred to 2 mL tubes. Samples were labeled with TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific). The 0.8 mg TMT reagents were suspended in 41 μL of anhydrous acetonitrile and 16 μL of this TMT reagent mixture was added to each sample or pool. A table with sample and pool matrixes for labeling can be found in Table S2.3. The samples were briefly vortexed and centrifuged, followed by a 1-hour incubation at room temperature. The labelling reaction was quenched with 2 μL 5% NH4OH and the samples were stored at -80 °C until fractionation with a high pH C18 chromatography using an Onyx C18 100 x 4.6 mm column. A 30-minute linear gradient from 5% to 30% solvent B at a flow rate of 1 mL per minute (solvent A: 95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate pH 9; solvent B: 95% acetonitrile, 5% water, 10 mM ammonium formate pH 9) was applied during fractionation. 60 x 0.6 mL fractions were collected and concatenated (e.g. 1, 11, 21, 31, 41, 51) to give 10 fractions for each TMT set. Fractions were brought to dryness by vacuum centrifuge and re-suspended in 50 μl 0.5% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile.
A Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo-Scientific, San Jose, CA) interfaced to the Thermo nanosource of an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Themo Scientific) was used to conduct Nanoflow LC-MS/MS on the TMT set fractions in duplicate. Assuming 50% recovery after digestion, 4 μL 0.75 ug μL -1 aliquots were injected to give 3 ug of protein on the column (30 cm x 0.075 mm ID, Proteo C18, 4 µm, 90 Å column, self-packed in a Picofrit fused silica nanospray emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA)). Flow rate was 0.3 μL/minute during loading and equilibration and 0.25 µL/min during sample elution. 2 hour runs with a gradient of 5% to 25% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) over 46 minutes and then 25% to 55% acetonitrile over 25 minutes followed by 7 minutes at 95% acetonitrile were conducted. A lock mass of 445.12003 m/z was used for internal mass calibration. The ion spray voltage was set to 1.6 kV and capillary temperature was 275 °C. Advanced gain control targets were 1e6, 5e4, and 1e4 for Orbitrap full MS, MSn scans and ion trap MSn scans, respectively. For each MS event with injection time of up to 250 and 150 ms for Oribitrap and ion trap MSn respectively, a single microscan was performed. MS1 scan range was 300-2000 m/z at a resolution of 30,000. From this selection, the 10 precursors with the highest intensity were selected for MS2 scans via collision induced dissociation with 35% normalized collision energy and a precursor isolation window of 2 m/z. Only peptides with charge states of 2+ to 5+ and at least a 3e4 MS1 intensity were eligible for MS2. The highest-intensity ion from MS2 was selected for high-energy collision dissociation at 65% normalized collision energy and resolution of 15,000. 

2.3.5 TMT Data Analysis – Mass spectrometry data was processed with Proteome Discoverer v2.1 to conduct a database search for all samples. The database was comprised of a protein coding model generated from a F. cylindrus genome assembly downloaded from NCBI and supplemented with chloroplast sequences (also from NCBI) along with a database of common protein contaminants (cRAP) downloaded on June 11, 2021. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances were set to 15 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Full trypsin enzyme specificity allowed for two missed cleavages. Both fixed and variable modifications were accounted for. Fixed modifications included peptide N-terminus and Lys TMT10plex (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.021 Da). The variable modifications were Methionine oxidation, N-Terminal Glutamine to pyro-Glutamate, and N-terminal protein Methionine-loss and Acetylation. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was estimated using decoy database searches and validated using Percolator with a delta Cn of 0.05 (Käll et al., 2007). Peptides with a co-isolation of more than 40% were excluded from quantification. Reporter ion integration mass tolerance was set to 0.003 Da. For protein quantification, the mean of all unique peptides matching to a given protein plus the shared peptides allocated according to Occam's Razor was calculated. Abundance values were reported as signal to noise ratios. 
The data was normalized with IRS (internal reference scaling) after contaminants identified from cRAP database were removed. The IRS normalization pipeline, adapted from the methods modified from Plubell et al., 2017 by Wu et al., 2019 for a similar dataset, is available at https://github.com/bertrand-lab/phaeo-mn-fe. For this normalization procedure, a protein must be observed in all TMT channels. Empty channels for a protein in the dataset were imputed as half of the minimum value for the protein in question. If a protein contained missing values for more than half of the samples, it was excluded from quantification (Webb-Robertson et al., 2015). Two samples were removed from the analysis as their removal yielded a 174% increase in the number of proteins that were able to be quantified (Supporting Information, Table S2.4). Results from each step of the normalization procedure can be seen in Supporting Information Figure S2.3. A principal component analysis was used to visualize the relationships between sample treatments (Supporting Information Figure S2.4). Normalized values were then used to determine differential protein expression using empirical Bayes quasi-likelihood F-tests via the glmQLFTest function in edgeR. To determine how protein expression in different treatments varied from the control (4 °C, +B12), three pairwise comparisons were made. These yielded information about (1) responses to B12 deprivation (control vs. 4 °C, - B12) (2) elevated temperature response (control vs. 12 °C, + B12), and (3) the interaction between the two stressors (control vs. 12 °C, - B12). Proteins were considered differentially expressed with a p-value < 0.05. NCBI protein accession numbers for differentially proteins were matched to functional assignments from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (Kanehisa et al., 2016) using the KEGGREST API. Henceforth, proteins ID’s refer to JGI protein ID’s.  
2.4 Results
2.4.1 Growth Parameters – After approximately 3 months of semicontinuous dilutions, the F. cylindrus cultures were determined to be acclimated. Mean growth rate (d-1) over the last 10 dilutions before the cultures were exposed to temperature treatments were not significantly different (Table 2.1; student’s t-test; p = 0.20). 





Table 2.1: Mean growth rates (µ; d-1) of the last 10 dilutions of F. cylindrus cultures before temperature treatment. Growth rates were computed from RFU measured every two days (pre-and post-dilution), which serves as a proxy for cell density (Supporting Information Fig. S2.1c).  µ = ln(Nt/N0)/∆t


F. cylindrus cell abundance was observed over a 72-hour period after upshift to the lethal temperature (12 °C) from the control temperature (4 °C). Cell density declined significantly after 24 hours of exposure to the 12 °C treatment (student’s t-test; p < 0.001; Figure 2.1a). The Fv/Fm of the lethal temperature treatments decreased significantly after 24 hours (student’s t-test; p < 0.001; Figure 2.1b). 
 

  
Figure 2.1: Cell densities and photosynthetic efficiency responses over time of F. cylindrus to change in temperature. a) Boxplot of F. cylindrus cell densities, measured with flow cytometry, over time after exposure to control (4 °C) and elevated (12 °C) temperature treatments at 0 hours, and with and without the addition of vitamin B12 to the culture medium (n=3 for each treatment). Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values. Blue boxes represent 4° C treatments and red boxes represent 12 °C treatments. Color saturation represents B12 treatment, with saturated boxes representing B12-replete treatments and translucent boxes representing B12-deplete treatments. Cell number at 24 hours was significantly different between temperatures. A t-test for difference of means at 24 hours was conducted, showing a significant decline in cell number between the 4 and 12 °C treatment (p < 0.001). b) Boxplots with the same scheme showing change in Fv/Fm in F. cylindrus after exposure to the control and elevated temperature treatments. Data from each biological replicate represents the 2 technical measurements. 


2.4.2 Methionine Synthase Concentrations – 24 hours after exposure to temperature treatment, protein per cell was significantly higher in the elevated temperature treatments (Figure 2.2a; student’s t-test; p < 0.01) and did not vary with B12 treatment. Peptide markers for MetH and MetE methionine synthases were quantified in F. cylindrus cultures (Figure 2.2b,c). MetH quotas were comparatively low and remained constant with B12 and temperature treatments (Figure 2.2b). In contrast, MetE peptide content increased starkly in cultures provided deprived of exogenous B12 (p < .001; Figure 2.2c). There was no significant impact of temperature on MetE per cell (Figure 2.2c). 
  
Figure 2.2: Protein measurements from F. cylindrus cultures 24 hours after exposure to control (4 °C) and elevated (12  C) temperature treatments, with and without the addition of exogenous B12. a) Total protein (femtograms cell-1) b) Femtomoles of diagnostic MetH peptide (KJ866915.1) cell-1 and c) Femtomoles of diagnostic MetE peptide (KJ866917.1) cell-1. Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values of 3 biological replicates per treatment and duplicate injections. Blue boxes represent 4 °C treatments and red boxes represent 12 °C treatments. Color saturation represents B12 treatment, with translucent boxes representing B12-deplete and saturated boxes representing B12-replete treatments.

2.4.3 Proteomic Discovery Experiment – A Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) discovery experiment was conducted with biomass from control and lethal temperatures after 24 hours of exposure. 3,004 proteins were initially detected from 18,349 predicted from the genome. After normalization and imputation steps, 1,357 protein expression profiles were quantified. A differential expression analysis was conducted by making three pairwise comparisons to determine how protein expression in different treatments varied from the control (4 °C, +B12). These yielded information about (1) responses to B12 deprivation (control vs. 4 °C, - B12) (2) elevated temperature response (control vs. 12 °C, + B12), and (3) the interaction between the two stressors (control vs. 12 °C, - B12). The results of this differential expression analysis showed that 96 (7%) of the proteins that were quantified were differentially expressed in response to B12 deprivation and elevated temperature (including the interactive effects of the two stressors) compared to control (Figure 2.3). The highest number of proteins were differentially expressed in response to the interactive effects of B12 deprivation and elevated temperature (197), followed by elevated temperature (50) and B12 deprivation alone (25; Figure 2.3).

  
Figure 2.3: Venn Diagram of the number differentially expressed proteins in F. cylindrus compared to the control treatment (4 °C, + B12) in samples harvested 24 hours after temperature treatment. 3004 proteins were initially detected and 1,357 were quantified. Each circle shows the number of quantified proteins found to be differentially expressed via a Bayes quasi-likelihood F-test conducted in edgeR with a corrected p-value < 0.05. Three pairwise comparisons were made: the response to B12 deprivation (green; control vs. 4° C, -B12); the response to elevated temperature treatment (pink; control vs. 12° C, + B12); and the response between the two stressors (purple; control vs. 12° C, -B12).

The functional assignments of differentially expressed proteins that had annotations available in the KEGG database can be seen in Figure 2.4.  The B12 response appears to be characterized by proteins associated with the Transport and Catabolism, Carbohydrate Metabolism, and Genetic Information processing. The elevated temperature response was associated with Transport and Catabolism and Genetic Information Processing, in addition to Cofactor and Vitamin metabolism. Many more proteins annotated as associated with Genetic Information Processing were differentially expressed in response to both B12 deprivation and elevated temperature, with a large portion belonging to the Translation category. There were also many more Carbohydrate and Energy Metabolism-associated proteins, as well as signal transduction proteins: nearly 4 times more than in either other comparison. 
 
Figure 2.4: Total functional assignments for differentially expressed (p < 0.05) proteins that have available KEGG annotations for the 3 pairwise comparisons, representing proteins that are differentially expressed in response to B12 deprivation, elevated temperature, and the combined effects of B12 deprivation and elevated temperature. Color represents KEGG level A annotations, with KEGG level B annotations along the left side. A single protein may have multiple assignments. 

Figure 2.5 shows a heatmap of significantly differentially expressed proteins with a log2 mean abundance greater than 10.5 from all three pairwise comparisons. Hierarchical clustering was used to group proteins by expression pattern. 53% of proteins had no annotation available. Most of the visualized proteins can be attributed to the interaction between B12 deprivation and elevated temperature (Fig. 2.5). 
 
Figure 2.5: Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus with a log2 mean abundance more than 10.5 and p < 0.01 from any pairwise comparisons between the control (4° C, +B12) representing the response to B12 deprivation (control vs. 4° C, -B12); the response to elevated temperature treatment (control vs. 12° C, + B12); and the response between the two stressors (control vs. 12° C, -B12). Each row is one protein, and each column is one biological replicate. Dendrograms represent hierarchical clustering by protein from Pearson’s correlation with average linkage. Columns are ordered by treatment. The cell colors are based on mean-scaled z-score, with blue representing a protein with decreased expression and red an increased expression compared to the mean. n = 2 for three treatments the due to removal after normalization (12° C, + B12, 12° C, - B12; Supporting Information, Table S2.3) and failure to process due to a labeling error (4° C, -B12).
2.4.4 Proteomic Responses to B12 Deprivation – A heatmap of the seven proteins differentially expressed at p < .01 in response to B12 deprivation can be seen in Figure 2.6. A full list of proteins differentially expressed in response to B12 deprivation can be seen in Supporting Information, Table S2.5, along associated with p-values and fold changes. All proteins differentially expressed with a significance threshold of p < 0.01 were enriched in the B12-depleted cultures. This prominently included B12-independent methionine synthase (MetE; ID: 228154), a cobalamin acquisition protein (CBA1; ID: 246327), and a P-ATPase (ID: 168079) associated with transmembrane activity. A cytosolic chaperone, T-complex protein 1 subunit gamma (195967) was also found to be upregulated.  Additionally, a P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase protein (ID: 274747), and ribosomal protein S12 (ID: 271288) were upregulated, but this trend was not consistent between replicates.   
 
Figure 2.6: Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus representing the response to B12 deprivation (control vs. 4° C, -B12). Each row shows a proteins found to be differentially expressed via a Bayes quasi-likelihood F-test conducted in edgeR with a corrected p-value < 0.01. Each column represents the protein expression of one biological replicate. Dendrograms represent hierarchical clustering by protein from Pearson’s correlation with average linkage. Columns are ordered by treatment. The cell colors are based on mean-scaled z-score, with blue representing a protein with decreased expression and red an increased expression compared to the mean.

Other proteins of interest differentially expressed with a significance threshold of p < 0.05 included two additional proteins associated with the methionine cycle: cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferase (cSHMT; ID: 277738), which was found to be upregulated and methionine gamma lyase (ID: 259901), which was downregulated in response to B12 deprivation. A suite of proteins annotated as participating in heme biosynthesis were also among the differentially expressed proteins. Protein 247844, which is annotated as protoporphyrin IX Mg-chelatase subunit D (ChlD2-H) in NCBI was upregulated in the absence of B12, whilst porphobilinogen synthase (ID: 218256) was downregulated. Furthermore, phosphofructokinase (ID: 263182), belonging to the glycolytic pathway, was upregulated as well, in addition to a putative blue light sensing auerochrome (ID: 260397). Additionally, acetate CoA ligase (ID: 239808), which is known to be involved in fatty acid biosynthesis was downregulated.

2.4.5 Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperatures – A heatmap of the twenty proteins differentially expressed in response to the 12° C treatment with p < 0.01 is shown in Figure 2.7. A full list of proteins differentially expressed in response to the elevated temperature treatment can be seen in Supporting Information, Table S2.6, along associated with p-values and fold changes. Many of the proteins involved in responses to temperature were identified as putatively related to protein synthesis and included ribosomal biosynthesis proteins in addition to ribosomes themselves. For example, 60S ribosomal protein L24 (ID: 268718), the GTP-binding protein EngA (ID: 196010), a DEAD-domain containing protein (ID: 183391), and an unidentified protein which has similarities to RNA polymerase II (ID: 275154) were all downregulated. 

 
Figure 2.7: Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus representing the response to elevated temperature (control vs. 12° C, +B12). Each row shows a protein found to be differentially expressed via a Bayes quasi-likelihood F-test conducted in edgeR with a corrected p-value < 0.01. Each column represents the protein expression of one biological replicate. Dendrograms represent hierarchical clustering by protein from Pearson’s correlation with average linkage. Columns are ordered by treatment. The cell colors are based on mean-scaled z-score, with blue representing a protein with decreased expression and red an increased expression compared to the mean.

Proteins related to genetic information processing were broadly affected by temperature. 3 P-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase proteins (ID’s: 208780, 205573, 182871), which are known to export peptides across membranes but also can be involved in translation and DNA repair, were found to be both up and downregulated. Furthermore, proteins associated with the condensin complex, which is involved in chromosome assembly, were also observed to be upregulated (ID’s: 233571 and 210755). Additionally, the alpha subunit of ribonucleotide reductase (RNR; ID: 205957) was downregulated with high temperatures. The thiamine biosynthesis protein ThiC was also downregulated under high temperatures, in addition to Methionine sulfoxide reductase B (ID: 274188), which is known to be a cold response protein in Arabidopsis (Dos Santos et al., 2005). 
As in the B12 treatment, proteins related to tetrapyrrole biosynthesis were also differentially expressed. However, all tetrapyrrole synthesis proteins differentially expressed in the temperature treatment were downregulated in response to the elevated temperature treatment. A protoporphyrin IX Mg-chelatase subunit D (ID: 170289), different from the sequence which was upregulated in response to the B12 deprivation treatment, was downregulated in response to the 12° C treatment, in addition to porphobilinogen synthase (ID: 218256), and uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase (ID: 268500). The most significantly differentially expressed protein was an unknown possibly cytoskeletal protein (ID: 271832) labeled as “projectin/twitchin-related” that was upregulated at high temperatures. A BLAST search of this protein yields no similar sequences in other organisms. There were 3 other proteins differentially expressed at p < 0.01 (ID’s: 262424, 236198, 173335) that yielded a similar lack of information. 
2.4.6 Interactive Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperatures and B12 Deprivation – A heatmap of proteins differentially expressed in response to the combined elevated temperature and B12 deprivation treatments can be seen in Figure 2.8. A full list of proteins differentially expressed in response to the combined stressors can be seen in Supporting Information Table S2.7, along with associated with p-values and fold changes. The interaction response shares several proteins with the canonical B12 (ex: cSHMT, MetE, CBA1, P-ATPase, casein kinase delta, Mg-chelatase subunit D (ID: 247844)) and temperature (including several ribosomal and genetic information processing proteins, a Mg-chelatase subunit D (ID:170289), ThiC, and others) responses, leaving 69 proteins unique to the treatment. The unique proteins made up 71% of all differentially expressed proteins from all treatments at p < 0.01. Among these unique proteins, there were additional tetrapyrrole synthesis proteins such as a partial uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase (ID: 216482) and a chloroplastic protoporphyrin IX Mg-chelatase (ID: 1773362895). A CobW-domain containing protein (ID: 274493) was upregulated as well. 






  Figure 2.8: Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins from TMT experiment in F. cylindrus representing the interactive response to B12 deprivation and elevated temperature (control vs. 12° C, -B12). Each row shows a protein found to be differentially expressed via a Bayes quasi-likelihood F-test conducted in edgeR with a corrected p-value < 0.01. Each column represents the protein expression of one biological replicate. Dendrograms represent hierarchical clustering by protein from Pearson’s correlation with average linkage. Columns are ordered by treatment. The cell colors are based on mean-scaled z-score, with blue representing a protein with decreased expression and red an increased expression compared to the mean.

Plots of the relationship between mean abundance and fold change of the differentially expressed proteins in the three comparisons can be seen in Figure 2.9. The individual responses to B12 deprivation and elevated temperature are small (Figure 2.9a,b) compared to the response to the combined stressors, in which an increased number of proteins show high abundance and significant fold changes. It appeared that many proteins differentially expressed in response to the combination of these external stressors displayed an apparent relationship between fold change and abundance, with larger fold changes corresponding to decreased abundance (Figure 2.9c). A few proteins do not adhere to this relationship, including MetE, an uncharacterized protein (ID: 271832), CBA1, EngA, and a nucleoside triphosphate hydrolase. An additional protein (ID: 182880) is also an outlier, but this trend is not reproduced amongst replicates (Figure 2.9c).
   

Figure 2.9: Log2 mean abundance and log2 fold change of proteins differentially expressed in response to a) B12 deprivation b) elevated temperature c) combined B12 deprivation and elevated temperature (p < 0.05) in F. cylindrus. Colors represent KEGG functional assignment. Proteins with an absolute log2 fold change and log2 mean abundance more than 2.5 and 8, respectively, are labelled. 

 
2.5 Discussion

This study suggests that the combined effects of B12 deprivation and temperature on the proteome of F. cylindrus are synergistic rather than additive, leading to differences in protein expression in cultures exposed to both stressors not seen in cells treated with each stressor individually. While we found that growth decreased at supra-optimal temperatures, regardless of B12 availability, complex proteomic rearrangements were observed in response to the combined stressors. Amongst these rearrangements, we identify a host of interactively enriched uncharacterized proteins, including proteins that may be used to remodel B12.
2.5.1 B12-Mediated Heat Resistance – We expected that the presence of exogenous B12 would rescue F. cylindrus from heat stress. After exposure to the lethal temperature treatment, cells experienced markers of heat stress, such as cell number decline and decreased photosynthetic capacity (Figure 2.1a,b), regardless of the addition of exogenous B12 to the culture medium, in contrast to results from Xie et al., 2013 in C. reinhardtii. Therefore, our results provide evidence against the existence of B12-mediated heat resistance in F. cylindrus. In the absence of B12, Xie et al., 2013 found that metE transcripts decreased in C. reinhardtii in response to increased temperatures, likely leading to decreased methylation capacity and declines in cell density.  In contrast, we found no significant impact on MetE due to temperature, suggesting that the enzyme persists even at lethal temperatures, in F. cylindrus (Fig. 2.2b & c).
Diatoms are known to dominate in dynamic, post succession environments, demonstrating high phenotypic plasticity (Cox 2014; Sackett et al., 2013). Evidence suggests that SO diatoms like F. cylindrus depend heavily on the use of MetE, as cobalamin is often in short supply (Ellis et al., 2017; Bertrand et al., 2015). Notably, a higher proportion of SO diatoms possess the ability to utilize the B12-independent methionine synthase pathway via MetE than others globally (Ellis et al., 2017). Although the reasons behind why F. cylindrus is able to maintain the production of MetE at supra-optimal temperatures whilst C. reinhardtii is not remain unclear, this may be further evidence of these diatom’s resilience to the SO’s harsh conditions, including periodic B12 limitation and heat stress. 

2.5.2 Proteomic Responses to B12 Deprivation – Bertrand et al. 2012 describes three strategies taken by diatoms to manage the effects of vitamin B12 deprivation. They include efforts to (1) increase cobalamin acquisition capacity (2) decrease cobalamin demand and (3) manage their decreased methionine synthesis ability. The proteomic responses to B12 deprivation observed in F. cylindrus by this study include these strategies, in addition to additional changes not previously identified in diatoms.  
Cobalamin Acquisition: Uptake and Remodelling – Proteins which may be used to increase cobalamin acquisition, included increased expression of a cobalamin acquisition protein, in addition to possible remodelling activity. The cobalamin acquisition protein CBA1 was upregulated in response to B12 deprivation (Figure 2.10). Transcripts encoding CBA1 (cobalamin acquisition protein 1), were first identified in Bertrand et al. 2012 in diatoms from a variety of marine environments. Although the exact mechanism of CBA1 function remains unclear, its differential expression in this study provides additional evidence of its role in cobalamin uptake in diatoms. 
We hypothesize that a protein detected here may be acting as a previously undescribed part of a B12 remodelling or scavenging response by activating the lower ligand of partial cobalamin molecules, as described below (Fig. 2.10). Some B12 remodellers, including some diatoms, can transform cobalamin-related compounds into cobalamin by altering the lower ligand.  Helliwell and colleagues found that 2 of 8 tested alga were able to produce cobalamin when provided with pseudocobalamin and cobalamin’s lower ligand, DMB (5, 6-di-methylbenzimidazole) and that this ability was removed in CobT mutants (Helliwell et al., 2016). The remodeling capabilities of F. cylindrus have, to date, not been examined. In this study, Protein 247844, which is annotated in the JGI database as Chl-D (Mg-chelatase subunit D), was upregulated in response to B12 deprivation. We will henceforth refer to this protein as a B12-dependent Chl-D. The small, large, and small subunits of Mg-chelatase are hypothesized to have common evolutionary origins with corresponding subunits of the Co-chelatase enzyme (Fodje et al., 2001). In particular, both Mg-chelatase and Co-chelatase share an integrin I domain and an acidic and proline-rich region (Fodje et al., 2001). The Co-chelatase subunits CobT, CobS, and CobN are associated with cobalamin remodeling and are thought to be involved in DMB synthesis and activation in bacteria (Yi et al. 2012). There is evidence that some organisms may utilize a chimeric Co-Chelatase, using Chl-D in the place of CobT (Rodionov et al., 2003). The length of the B12-dependent Chl-D in F. cylindrus is very similar to other Mg-Chelatase subunits in bacteria and archaea (Antonov 2021) and conducting a BLAST search shows that it’s closest annotated match is a Blastochloris sp. Chld-D (Mg-chelatase subunit D). Other close matches are a number of putative cobalt chelatses in a varity of other organsisms. It is possible that F. cylindrus is using the B12-dependent Chl-D as part of a chimeric Co-chelatase protein to activate DMB for use in remodeling cobalamin-related molecules in response to B12 deprivation. We have yet to examine whether F. cylindrus is able to scavenge degraded B12 molecules or pseudocobalamin for use as cobalamin when provided with DMB. However, the expression patterns of this protein warrant further investigation into F. cylindrus’ possible role as an algal cobalamin remodeller. While the original work examining cobalamin-related compound remodeling focused on pseudcobalamin, pseudocobalamin is not expected to be as common in the SO as in other ocean regions due small cyanobacterial populations (Bertrand et al., 2011). The majority of B12 producers in the SO, for example Thaumarchaeota and gamma proteobacteria, produce cobalamin rather than pseudocobalamin (Doxey et al., 2015). However, degraded tetrapyrrole rings could be outfitted with DMB via this putative pathway in B12-scarce conditions to alleviate the effects of B12 deprivation. As a potential remodeller, F. cylindrus may increase the pool of biologically labile B12 for other consumers, contributing to their ability to survive in B12 scarce environments like the SO. This result illustrates that the relationship between producers and consumers of B12 has become increasingly blurred as we improve our understanding of cycling dynamics and microbial function (Helliwell et al., 2016). 
Moreover, an additional protein belonging to the tetrapyrrole synthesis pathway (Figure 2.10), which produces precursors to heme, chlorophyll, and vitamin B12 (Oborník et al., 2005) was downregulated. Porphobilinogen Synthase (PBGS; ID: 218256) is involved in the early stage of tetrapyrrole ring formation, and has been identified as a B12 biosynthesis protein (Raux et al., 2000). In contrast, Rao 2020 found members of the tetrapyrrole synthesis pathway to be upregulated in P. antarctica, a psychrophilic haptophyte, in response to B12 deprivation. Like F. cylindrus, P. antarctica is incapable of producing cobalamin de novo, but both organisms appear to differentially express portions of the cobalamin biosynthetic pathway in response to cobalamin deprivation. 
Cobalamin Demand – In addition to investing in strategies for obtaining more cobalamin, organisms can also attempt to decrease cobalamin demand to alleviate the effects of B12 deprivation. This study highlighted the methionine synthase, MetE as a key protein for this task, consistent with previous work (Helliwell et al., 2011; Bertrand et al., 2012; Ellis et al., 2017). In F. cylindrus, MetE was upregulated in B12-deplete treatments in order to utilize the B12-independent methionine synthase pathway (Figure 2.10). This trend was demonstrated in the global proteomic data as well (Figure 2.6). A P-ATPase (ID: 168079) was identified is being upregulated in the absence of B12 (Figure 2.6). These types of ATP-ases are known to be involved in metal transport activity. MetE is known to utilize zinc as a cofactor (Zhou et al., 1999) and Bertrand et al., 2013 suggests that B12 deprivation can lead to up to a 40-fold increase in zinc requirements in P. tricornutum. Therefore, it may be possible that this protein is involved in facilitating zinc uptake to meet this demand. Interestingly, neither Methylmalonyl CoA Mutase (MCM) nor any ATP:corrinoid adenosyltransferases, which is required to produce its cofactor adenosylcobalamin from cyanocobalamin (Suh et al., 1993), were detected in the proteome despite their sequences’ presence in the genome. 
Methionine Synthase Capacity – Managing decreased methionine synthase capacity is the final described strategy for coping with B12 deprivation (Bertrand et al., 2012). The effects of decreased methionine synthase capacity are disruptions to folate cycling and methionine scarcity, leading to methyl folate trapping and DNA synthesis (Scott & Weir 1981; Roje 2006). Two proteins falling under this category of response were differentially expressed – cSHMT and Methionine gamma lyase. cSHMT (cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferase), which interconverts THF (tetrahydrofolate) and 5,10-MTHF (5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate), was found to be upregulated in response to B12 deprivation. 5,10-MTHF is known to disrupt folate cycling in low cobalamin conditions in (Scott & Weir 1981). It has been hypothesized that cSHMT upregulation can help to prevent these disruptions (Bertrand et al., 2012). 
Furthermore, METase (ID: 25990; methionine gamma lyase) was downregulated in response to B12 deprivation (Fig. 2.10). Decreases to SAM (S-Adenosyl Methionine; of which methionine is a precursor) are prevalent in B12-deprived diatom cultures (Bertrand and Allen 2012; Bertrand et al. 2012; Heal et al. 2019. METase converts L-methionine into methanethiol to balance homocysteine levels (Sato & Nozaki 2009) and therefore, it is possible that this enzyme was no longer needed in the event of an absence of available surplus of methionine for conversion. 
Other Impacts of B12 Deprivation – A putative blue-light sensing auerochrome (ID: 260397) was found to upregulated in the absence of B12. The light regime in the SO is one characterized by prolonged periods of darkness, requiring extensive adaptations to preserve function without light for up to four months per year (Kennedy et al., 2019). Light dependent gene regulation mediated by vitamin B12 has been observed in the bacterium, Myxococcus xanthus. In this pathway, adenosylcobalamin is involved in the transcriptional response that deals with the production of carotenoids for avoidance of light stress (Ortiz-Guerrero et al., 2011). In the dark, adenosylcobalamin can bind to the CarH transcriptional factor and block a promoter region that synthesizes carotenoids. When the cell is exposed to light, adenosylcobalamin is rapidly photolyzed and the synthesis of carotenoids can begin. It is possible a similar B12 response can activate the expression of this blue light sensing aureochrome as a secondary block to unnecessary carotenoid production, warranting further investigation. 

2.5.3 Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperature – A total of 50 proteins were identified as differentially expressed in response to elevated temperature (4% of the quantified proteome). Although few studies have examined the effect of elevated temperature on the proteome in diatoms, this value is aligned with others from the literature, which ranged from 0.6 to 17% in supra-optimal temperature treatments, and lower than one study with a lethal temperature treatment in which 22% of proteins were differentially expressed (Table 2.2). 
 
Table 2.2: Literature comparisons of the proteome fraction of differentially expressed proteins after exposure to elevated temperature. Included are organism type, temperature treatment (including whether the temperature treatment was an upshift or comparison between previously acclimated treatments and effect to the organism), the total number of identified proteins, the number of differentially expressed proteins, and the percentage of differentially expressed proteins out of the total number of identified proteins. 


Cold adapted organisms require substantial changes to their protein expression and function to maintain growth at low temperatures, which reduce protein turnover and membrane fluidity (Feller et al., 2013). To address reduced turnover, psychrophiles can overexpress photosynthetic proteins, cold shock proteins, including chaperones for increasing folding, and proteins involved in protein transcription and translation (Collins & Margesin 2019; Toseland et al., 2013). The responses to the elevated temperature treatment in F. cylindrus included changes to the expression of critical enzymes like those involved in protein production, photosynthetic proteins, and cold shock responses. Surprisingly, no heat shock proteins were included in the list of proteins differentially expressed in response to temperature. It may be that the temperature response was dominated by changes to baseline expression normally associated with cold adapted organisms. A few proteins related to genetic processing, particularly translation, could be considered responses to protein degradation and misfolding due to elevated temperatures. Cold-adapted enzymes are known to be more heat-labile than others, especially within the active site (Feller 2013). A variety of ribosomal proteins were also down regulated with elevated temperature (Figure 2.8). This may have been due to a reduced demand for protein production under conditions which increase protein turnover.  Additionally, two proteins associated with tetrapyrrole synthesis were downregulated in the high temperature treatment - PBGS (porphobilinogen synthase; ID: 218256) and UROD (uroporphyrinogen III decarboxylase; ID: 216482) (Figure 2.10). Liang et al., 2019 observed the downregulation of tetrapyrrole synthesis transcripts in an experiment in which a cold-adapted Chaetoceros species was exposed to supra-optimal temperatures. Perhaps this change is associated with the upregulation of photosynthesis-related proteins at low temperatures. If this was the case, in response to high temperatures, F. cylindrus would no longer need to overexpress proteins upstream from chlorophyll synthesis. 
 
 
Figure 2.10: Illustration demonstrating the differential expression of proteins in the methionine cycle and related processes. Enzymes/proteins are represented as orange ovals, with JGI protein ID’s below their name. Metabolites are written in black text. Each of the three boxes below a protein represent their differential expression in response to B12-stavation (purple outline) elevated temperature (blue outline) the interaction between the two stressors (green outline). The box fill color represents protein expression: enriched (red), no change (white), depleted (blue) or not detected (grey). Adapted from Bertrand et al., 2012 and created with BioRender.com.

2.5.4 Interactive Proteomic Responses to Elevated Temperature and B12 Deprivation – These results demonstrate that the interactive responses to elevated temperature and B12 deprivation in F. cylindrus involve complex proteomic rearrangements. The most statistically significant responses were shared with the individual temperature and B12 responses, demonstrating that biomarkers historically used to survey diatoms for B12 deprivation are reliable, even at lethal temperatures. Additionally, the majority of proteins differentially expressed in response to the combined stressors were unique to this treatment. From this group, a number of highly abundant proteins with exceptional fold changes were identified in response to the interactive treatment. The presence of these unique proteins is evidence of synergistic responses to multiple stressors, as the combined response was found to be different than the sum of the responses to each stressor individually. 

2.5.5 Conclusions – Mounting evidence places B12 among important drivers of microbial ecology and biogeochemistry in the SO, making it worthy of expanded exploration in the context of increasing sea surface temperatures. This study is the first to observe the molecular effects of vitamin B12 deprivation and elevated temperature in a psychrophilic diatom. Our results provide baseline information about the molecular effects of B12 deprivation, providing a framework for understanding the vitamin’s role in the growth and physiology of other cold-adapted diatoms and their broader communities. Clarifying how the effects of B12 deprivation are affected by temperature is a crucial secondary step, as exposure to elevated temperature has become increasingly relevant as the potential for extreme microclimates and heat waves increase as ocean temperatures rise due to anthropogenic inputs of carbon dioxide.  B12 deprivation and elevated temperature responses were found to persist at the intersection of the two stressors, suggesting that proteomic biomarkers used to survey B12 limitation in diatoms in-situ are reliable, even at lethal temperatures. 
Clarifying controls on the growth of primary producers has proved important for making climatic predictions but making distinctions between auxotrophy and non-auxotrophy by growth rate only addresses a single facet of the physiological effects of vitamin deprivation and their broader biogeochemical consequences. We found that growth was unaffected by B12 availability but observed that F. cylindrus employed various proteomic strategies for managing the combined stressors via an increased number of differentially expressed proteins, including possible enrichment of B12 remodelling pathways. Considering F. cylindrus’ potential as a putative remodeller, it is possible that it can contribute to the biologically labile B12 pool, allowing it and other consumers to persist in B12 scarce conditions like those in the SO, affecting community composition. The results of this study highlight the important role of vitamin B12 availability on the SO’s biogeochemistry in the face of a warming ocean.

 
Chapter III: The Effects of Vitamin B12 Deprivation on Physiology and Metabolite Production of the Polar Diatom, Fragilariopsis cylindrus

3.1 Abstract
Vitamin B12, also known as cobalamin, is a cobalt-containing micronutrient estimated to be required for growth by half of all eukaryotic phytoplankton. Despite its importance, our knowledge of vitamin B12 requirements and utilization remains limited in diatoms. In this study, we examine the effects of vitamin B12 deprivation on diatom physiology and metabolite production and present the first direct measurements of cellular B12 quotas in an ecologically significant polar diatom, Fragilariopsis cylindrus. We grew F. cylindrus cultures at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12 and, using targeted metabolite quantification approaches, we monitored the abundance of four cobalamin factors, in addition to a suite of metabolites previously shown to be affected by B12 deprivation. We also measured the expression of the B12-requiring methionine synthase enzyme, MetH and its B12-independent alternative, MetE. F. cylindrus cells contained an average of 0.30 attomoles of B12 per cell in B12-replete conditions and B12 quotas far exceeded the MetH content of the cell, suggesting luxury uptake of the vitamin. Additionally, the abundance of DMSP and the vitamin B1 precursor cHET increased significantly in response to B12 deprivation. Our results suggest that the effects of B12 scarcity may result in impacts to F. cylindrus’ role in microbial assemblages via the potential differential production of growth stimulating compounds.


 
3.2 Introduction

Vitamin B12, also known as cobalamin, is a cobalt-containing micronutrient found in picomolar to sub-picomolar concentrations in the ocean (Sañudo-Wilhelmy et al., 2006). Over half of surveyed algal species in culture collections are B12 auxotrophs, meaning that they require the vitamin for growth (Croft et al., 2005). Given its combined scarcity and requirement by many microbes, it is likely that vitamin B12’s availability may act as an important control of microbial community structure and bloom dynamics. The link between B12 availability and community-level effects on oceanic microbes has been explored by several studies, which have demonstrated that B12 availability can alter community composition, net productivity, and growth in a variety of marine environments (Sañudo-Wilhelmy et al., 2006; Gobler et al., 2017; Koch et al., 2011; Bertrand et al., 2007; Browning et al., 2017). As with other trace nutrients, low concentrations of vitamin B12 may significantly affect individual and community microbial dynamics in the ocean, putatively influencing processes such as nutrient cycling, carbon export, and the production of important allelopathic and climatically relevant compounds (Moore et al., 2013). However, despite its importance, our knowledge of B12 utilization, uptake, and cycling in ecologically significant phytoplankton species remains scarce. To date, only a single study has explored the metabolic impacts of vitamin B12 deprivation in diatoms (Heal et al., 2019) and no direct measurements of B12 cellular quotas have been made for a cultured psychrophilic (cold-adapted) diatom. 
In addition to being difficult to detect in the ocean due to low concentration and high photolability, the production and utilization of cobalamin varies significantly between microbial clades, making it challenging to study comprehensively (Helliwell et al., 2016). Cobalamin-related compounds have an upper and lower ligand, leading to various combinations that are produced and utilized by different clades and can play different biological roles. Either DMB (5, 6-di-methylbenzimidazole) or adenine can act as the lower ligand in B12. The four cobalamin compounds all possess DMB as a ligand (Figure 3.1). If the lower ligand is adenine, the resulting cobamide is a pseudocobalamin variant (Tanioka et al., 2009; Helliwell et al., 2016). Certain groups of the prokaryotes, including some cyanobacteria, can synthesize B12, in the form of pseudocobalamin (Raux et al., 2000) and evidence provided by Helliwell et al., 2016 suggests that pseudocobalamin is on the order of 100 times less available for use by eukaryotic algae. The four variants of cobalamins which possess DMB as the lower ligand, are adenosyl-, cyano-, methyl- and hydroxocobalamin (Figure 3.1). Adenosyl- and methylcobalamin are used in the cell as cofactors in the highly conserved enzymes, MetH (B12-dependent methionine synthase) and MCM (methylmalonyl-CoA mutase), which participate in methylation and radical rearrangements, respectively, in eukaryotic algae (Croft et al., 2006). Adenosyl- and methylcobalamin are both extremely photolabile, quickly degrading to hydroxocobalamin, which is considered an intermediate product, upon exposure to light (Juzeniene & Nizauskaite 2013). Hydroxo- and cyanocobalamin are not biologically active and must be converted to a biologically active form before use in the cell (Banjaree & Ragsdale 2003). 

 
Figure 3.1: Four possible structural variants of vitamin B12 based on the nature of the upper ligand. On the left, the corrin ring structure of cobalamin with a cobalt ion in the centre can be seen. Variations of the cobalamin molecule may be produced by different lower (α) or upper (β) ligand. On the right, four possible β ligands are presented: an Ado-, CN-, Me-, and OH-, which produce adenosyl-, cyano-, methyl-, and hydroxocobalamin respectively. In cobalamin, the alpha ligand is DMB. Adapted from Heal et al., 2016. 

Vitamin B12 is used as a cofactor in the enzyme MetH, which catalyses the production of the essential amino acid methionine from methyltetra-hydrofolate using methylcobalamin as a cofactor (Banjaree & Matthews 1990). Some organisms can use a B12-independent alternative, MetE, to meet their methionine synthesis needs in the absence of B12 (Banjaree & Matthews 1990). Evidence suggests that MetH is the primary sink for vitamin B12 in eukaryotic microalgae, as organisms with the presence of genes encoding MetH but not MetE are most often B12 auxotrophs (Helliwell et al., 2011). Compared to MetH, MetE has a 60-100 times slower rate of catalysis (Taylor & Weissbach 1973), which may be why it has been observed to be expressed at much higher abundance under B12 deprivation than MetH. For example, Bertrand et al., 2013 found that B12-depleted cultures of P. tricornutum, a temperate diatom, expressed MetE at values proportional to the differences in the enzymes’ turnover rates, with an approximately 60-fold greater abundance of MetE compared to MetH levels in replete conditions. Bertrand and others have suggested that trade-offs between the benefits of the enzyme efficiency and resource costs of the B12 dependent and independent methionine synthase pathways based on B12 availability may drive the retention of MetE as a methionine synthesis strategy in eukaryotic algae (Bertrand et al., 2013; Bertrand & Allen 2012; Helliwell et al., 2011; Ellis et al., 2017). 
B12 deprivation appears to have widespread effects on physiology and metabolite production in B12 auxotrophs and non-auxotrophs alike, as shown by measurements made from cultures of the diatoms Phaeodactylum tricornutum (non-auxotrophic for B12) and Thalassiosira pseudonana (a B12 auxotroph) (Bertrand et al., 2012; Heal et al., 2017; Heal et al., 2019). These studies suggest that there are specific cellular processes which appear to be disrupted by B12 deprivation in diatoms: (1) the production of methionine and its precursors and products, (2) vitamin B1 biosynthesis, and (3) the abundance of cellular osmolyte pools. 
Previous works imply that methionine synthesis capacity is reduced in both B12 auxotrophs and non-auxotrophs in B12-deplete conditions. Methionine is a precursor to SAM (S-adenosyl methionine), which has been demonstrated to be depleted in cobalamin-deprived cells (Bertrand & Allen 2012; Bertrand et al., 2012; Heal et al., 2017; Heal et al., 2019). After use in methylation reactions, SAM is degraded to SAH (S-adenosyl homocysteine), which, in high concentrations, can inhibit additional methylation reactions. Bertrand et al., 2012 found that the abundances of a SAM-producing protein (SAM synthetase) and a SAH-degrading protein (SAH hydrolase) in P. tricornutum increased with B12 deprivation, likely in efforts to balance SAM starvation and SAH buildup. 
SAM plays a variety of roles in the cell, including as a precursor to vitamin B1 (thiamin) biosynthesis and the production of osmolytes like DMSP (Stefels 2000; Chatterjee et al., 2008). Indeed, Bertrand and colleagues have observed that the B1 biosynthesis protein, ThiC and its transcripts increased in response to vitamin B12 deprivation in diatoms with and without MetE (Bertrand et al., 2012; Bertrand & Allen 2012). ThiC catalyses the production of the B1-precursor HMP (4-amino-5-hydroxymethyl-2-methylpyrimidine) using SAM. Bertrand and colleagues have hypothesized that it is possible that ThiC is upregulated in response to SAM deprivation, perhaps to maintain B1 biosynthesis despite the low abundance of SAM, a required precursor. 
Heal et al., 2019 also noted changes to osmoregulatory and acylcarnitine pools due to B12 deprivation-driven SAM starvation, including a decrease in intracellular DMSP concentrations. DMSP is an osmolyte and precursor to DMS, which is a critical component of the sulfur cycle and acts as a cloud condensation nucleus, classically thought to contribute to global albedo when released by phytoplankton exposed to supra-optimal temperature or light conditions (Charlson et al., 1987), though more recent work suggests that DMSP release by phytoplankton is primarily driven by senesce cause by viral lysis or bloom termination (Ayers & Cainey 2007). Furthermore, dissolved DSMP may make up to 13% of carbon pool available for uptake by heterotrophic bacteria (Kiene et al., 2000) and dissolved DMSP abundance may lead to increased DMS production after bacterial assimilatory sulfur requirements have been met (Kiene et al., 2000). Heal et al., were not able to determine that the aforementioned decrease in particulate DMSP in diatoms due to the absence of vitamin B12 was not growth rate driven, as DMSP production appeared to mirror growth rate. Exploring the link between vitamin B12 and metabolite abundance is important to improve our understanding of the vitamin’s impact on the production of compounds that stimulate microbial growth and play key roles in sulfur and carbon cycles such as vitamin B1 and DMSP. 
The consequences of vitamin B12 deprivation on physiology and metabolite production have yet to be explored in a psychrophilic diatom species. F. cylindrus, an ecologically significant Southern Ocean diatom and emerging model organism (Kang & Fryxell 1992; Faktorová et al., 2020). F. cylindrus is non-auxotrophic, possesses the genes for production of MetE (Helliwell et al., 2011) and, as established in Chapter II and previous studies (Ellis et al., 2017), demonstrates no difference in growth rate due to the deprivation of vitamin B12. 
In this study, we aim to determine how the absence of B12 affects this organisms’ basic physiological properties and metabolite abundance, in addition to how those metabolites relate to the abundance of the methionine synthase enzymes, MetE and MetH. There are currently few datasets that quantitatively examine protein and metabolites together in organisms like F. cylindrus. Here we present a unique opportunity to examine the relationship between how much B12 is taken up by F. cylindrus, and the resulting changes to its cellular physiology and abundance of select metabolites. 
To determine how vitamin B12 deprivation affects F. cylindrus, we grew axenic semicontinuous cultures with and without the addition of exogenous vitamin B12. After acclimation, we measured particulate carbon and nitrogen, cell size, and methionine synthase expression. We also analyzed the biomass for cobalamin-related compounds and a select number of metabolites previously identified as being impacted by B12 deprivation by Heal et al., 2019 (Table S3.1).  Our findings provide baseline information about an ecologically significant polar diatom’s responses to B12 deprivation, laying the framework for future study of other microbes in the SO and how they interact with vitamin B12, and the possible implications for microbial growth and nutrient cycling. 
3.3 Methods
3.3.1 Semicontinous Culturing – Axenic cultures of Fragilariopsis cylindrus (strain CCMP 1102) were obtained from Provasoli-Guillard National Center for Marine Algae and Microbiota. After inoculation into 250 mL vent-capped flasks, the cultures were maintained with sterile techniques at 6 °C. 6 °C was chosen as the optimal growth temperature for F. cylindrus based on previous measurements (Jabre & Bertrand 2020; Mock & Hoch 2005; Supporting Information, Figure S3.1). Cells were grown in f/2 medium (Guillard and Ryther 1962; Guillard 1975) made from sterilized synthetic seawater (Sunda et al., 2005, Price et al., 1988/89), with and without the addition of 369 pM cyanocobalamin. Irradiance in the incubators was set to approximately 100 μE m−2 s−1 in a 12:12 hour light-dark cycle. Cultures were diluted every three days, keeping them in a range of cell densities corresponding with exponential growth phase at this temperature, as established by previous cultures (Supporting information, Figure S3.2). Culture fluorescence was used to monitor cell number, as established with cell counts via flow cytometry (Supporting information, Figure S3.2). Cell counts were taken at the time of harvest with a BD Accuri™ C6 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). These measurements were also used to estimate cell size.

3.3.2 Cell Size Estimation – Three different sizes (0.75, 3, and 10 µm) of size calibration beads were suspended in Milli-Q water on a BD Accuri™ C6 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences).  Forward scatter was calibrated to bead size, allowing us to estimate F. cylindrus cell sizes (Figure S3.3). After plotting red fluorescence by forward scatter, a gate was manually tuned to select the cell populations. A calibration was conducted for every batch of flow cytometry runs to account for interreference caused by instrument drift. Cells were assumed to be cuboid. 

3.3.3 Quantification of Particulate Carbon and Nitrogen – 30 mL of each culture was filtered onto on 25 mm pre-combusted GF/F filters and stored at -80 °C. The samples were acidified for 6 hours in a glass desiccator with an open bottle of concentrated hydrochloric acid and later dried overnight in an oven at 45 °C. Then, filters were then packed in tin capsules and analyzed for particulate carbon and nitrogen on an elemental analyzer (Elementar Vario microcube) coupled to an IRMS (Isoprime 100). The samples were flash combusted at 1150 °C to convert particulate nitrogen and carbon into N2 and CO2 gas. These gaseous components were then analyzed by the Isoprime 100. The values were blank-corrected and divided by cell number to give per cell quota. 

3.3.4 Sample Preparation for Targeted Protein Analyses – Protein extractions for methionine synthase measurements were as described in Chapter II. A Micro BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific) was used to determine protein concentration in the supernatant. Proteins were digested with an S-Trap procedure modified from Profiti 2022. 5 mM DTT (1,4-Dithiothreitol) was used to reduce the proteins. The samples were cooled and alkylated with 15 mM IAM (Iodoacetamide). The reaction was quenched with another addition of 5 mM DTT. Samples were acidified with 12% phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2%. S-Trap buffer (90% aqueous methanol in 100 mM Triethylamonium bicarbonate, pH 7.1) was added in a 1:7 vol:sample vol ratio and loaded onto an S-Trap mini columns (Protifi) attached to a vacuum manifold. After 10 washes with 600 µL of S-Trap buffer, 125 µL of digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 25:1 wt:wt protein:trypsin) was used to saturate the column and moved to a 37 °C for 16 hours. 80 µL of 50 mM Ammonium bicarbonate was added and the columns were centrifuged at 4,000 XG for 1 min at room temperature. 80 µL 0.2% aqueous formic acid was added and the columns were centrifuge again as previously. Lastly, 80 μL of 50% acetonitrile containing 0.2% formic acid was added and the columns were centrifuged again. The peptide solutions were pooled and brought to dryness with a centrifuge concentrator. The dried peptide sample was resuspended in a 1% formic acid, 3% Acetonitrile solution to aim for 0.16 µg protein µL-1. A peptide BCA (Thermo Scientific) was conducted to confirm protein concentration of each sample before injection. 

3.3.5 Targeted Proteomic Analysis – As in Chapter II, a Dionex Ult 3000 UPLC integrated to a TSQ Quantiva mass spectrometer with the run same settings was used for targeted proteomic analysis. Heavy isotope labelled standards for MetE and MetH peptides were also added to the samples, as in Chapter II. For this experiment, 1 µg of protein was injected, with triplicate injections per biological replicate. The monitored peptides can be are the same from those in Chapter II (Supporting Information, Table S2.2).

3.3.6 Metabolite Sample Preparation – Our metabolite extraction is modified from Heal et al., 2014 and 2017. The entirety of the sample procedure was conducted in a dark room with a red light source and samples were kept on ice whenever possible.  Sample filters were placed in bead beater tubes and an internal standard mixture with heavy C13- labelled standards sourced from Cambridge Isotope Labs was added to each filter to achieve 1 picomole of heavy labelled cyanocobalamin, 10 picomoles of thiamine (vitamin B1) and riboflavin (vitamin B2), and 20 picomoles of biotin (vitamin B7) per 1000 µLs of extract. 0.2 mLs of each 100 and 400 µm silica beads were added to the tubes, along with 1000 µLs of ice-cold solvent mixture (40:40:20 acetonitrile:methanol:water) per 1.21 x 107 cells. A bead beater (MP Biomedicals) was used to agitate the cells in 3 x 40 second pulses at 1800 rotations per minute (RPM) over a 20-minute period. The tubes were briefly centrifuged, and the supernatant was removed to a clean tube. The centrifugation step was repeated once more and then the filter was rinsed with 30 µL of solvent mixture and centrifuged again. Two more similar washes were repeated with 300 µL of ice-cold methanol. At this point, the sample volume was aliquoted for metabolite analysis. The samples were then dried down with a Vacufuge and stored at -80 °C until analysis. 

3.3.7 Sample Preparation for Targeted Metabolite Analyses – Samples were resuspended in varying amounts of buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% Acetonitrile) to correct for differences in transferred sample volume and diluted 2-fold in conical polypropylene HPLC vials (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). A QC (Quality Control) sample was prepared by mixing 10 µL of each sample. Samples and QC’s were loaded onto a Dionex Ultimate-3000 LC system coupled to the electrospray ionization source of a TSQ Quantiva triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) in selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mode, operating under the following conditions: Q1 and Q3 resolution 0.7 (FWHM), 50 msec dwell time, spray voltage 3500 (positive ion mode), sheath gas 6, aux gas 2, ion transfer tube 325ºC, vaporizer temp 100ºC. A 150 x 0.3 mm ID column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, C-18, 2 µm, 100 Å) with a 5 x 0.3 mm ID guard column in front, held at 50 ºC was used and subject to an HPLC gradient of 2 – 32% B over 6 min, then 32 - 60% B over 0.5 min (A, 20 mM ammonium formate, 0.1% formic acid; B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 10 µl per min. The total run time including washing and equilibration was 12 minutes. 5 µL of each diluted sample was injected, with QC injections throughout the run to monitor instrument response and compound degradation. Authentic standards were spiked at increasing relevant concentrations (ranging from 0.5-100 femtomoles for the B12 analogs (Ado-, CN-, OH-, and Me-B12) and DMB and 2.5-500 femtomoles for all other compounds) in the QC and injected to create a calibration curve (Figure S3.6). Sample injection order for this experiment was randomized and interspersed between additional F. cylindrus extracts not included in this analysis. A list of monitored compounds and transitions can be found in Supporting Information, Table S3.1.

3.3.8 Metabolite Data Analysis – Metabolite data was processes with methods adapted from Boysen et al., 2018 and modified by the Bertrand Lab. Metabolites were normalized to their corresponding heavy internal standards. The B12 analogs were normalized to heavy cyanocobalamin. Thiamin (vitamin B1) was normalized to heavy thiamin. Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) was normalized to heavy riboflavin. Although we also added a heavy biotin (Vitamin B7), it was not used for normalization to biotin as it led to a decrease in QC variation (Supporting Information, Figure S2). For metabolites without a corresponding internal standard, a best matched internal standard (BMIS) was chosen by selecting normalizations that reduced QC coefficient of variation by more than 30% (Supporting Information, Figure S3.). The effect of the final chosen BMIS on QC variation in each metabolite can be seen in Supporting Information, Figure S3.5. Calibration curves were used to quantify metabolite concentration after correcting for the amount of metabolite already in each QC sample before standard addition (Figure S3.).





 
3.4 Results
3.4.1 Physiological Measurements – Estimated cell density for the cultures’ dilution series can be seen in  Figure 3.2Growth rate during the final ten dilutions before harvest was not found to be significantly different due to B12 treatment (p = 0.63; Table 3.1).  

Figure 3.2: Semicontinuous dilutions of axenic F. cylindrus cultures with and without the addition of exogenous B12. Fluorescence (RFU; relative fluorescence units) of each culture was measured before (filled in circles) and after (open circles) each dilution. Dotted lines represent an estimation of cell densities corresponding to exponential growth phase as established by previous cultures. Color represents B12 treatment, with B12-replete (+) in navy and B12-deplete (-) in green. Cultures were harvested shortly after the final timepoint (day 75).


 
Table 3.1:Physiological parameters of F. cylindrus cells grown at 6 °C. Growth rates were calculated from RFU’s measured during the last 10 dilutions before harvest and other parameters were measured from samples taken on day 75 (Figure 3.2). Mean and standard deviation of 3 biological replicates per treatment are presented, except for cellular carbon and nitrogen quotas, for which one +B12 treatment which was unable to be quantified due to sample loss. Cellular B12 quota estimates include summed adenosyl-, methyl-, and hydroxocobalamin quantifications. Any cyanocobalamin in the cultures was below the limit of detection (Supporting Information Figure S3.7). Specific uptake rate (u) was estimated using u = µQ, where Q represents intracellular quota (Droop 1973). Significance was tested with a Welsh’s t-test. p-values are represented in the Significance column, with p < 0.05 = *; p< 0.01= **; and ns = no significance.
Parameter	+B12




Mean carbon and nitrogen quotas were found to be 11.3 and 2.74 pg cell-1, respectively, and did not vary due to B12 treatment (Figure 3.3; p = 0.92; 0.78). Molar C:N ratios were found to be below Redfield (6.625; Redfield et al., 1963), with a mean of 4.077. An extended Redfield ratio, including vitamin B12 was calculated (Table 3.1).




 
Figure 3.3: Particulate carbon and nitrogen measurements from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C with and without the addition of exogenous B12. a) Picograms of carbon per cell b) Picograms of nitrogen per cell c) and molar C:N ratios (dotted line = Redfield; 106 C: 16 N; Redfield 1963) Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values of 3 biological replicates per treatment and triplicate injections. Color represents B12 treatment, with B12-replete (+) in navy and B12-deplete (-) in green.

Cell size was estimated to be 6.14 µm on average, and B12 deprivation appeared to result in larger cells (Table 1; Figure 3.4a; p < 0.05). By assuming cuboidal cells, we were able to calculate an estimated biovolume for F. cylindrus cells as well (Figure 3.4b).


 
Figure 3.4: a) Estimated cell diameter and b) estimated cell volume of F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12.  Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values of 3 biological replicates per treatment. Color represents B12 treatment, with B12-replete (+) in navy and B12-deplete (-) in green. 

3.4.2 Methionine Synthase Concentrations – Total protein per cell increased from 0.27 to 0.32 femtograms cell-1 in the B12 deprived treatment, but this change was not statistically significant (Table 3.1, Figure 3.5a; p = 0.19). MetE abundance in the B12-deprived cultures was 4.5-fold that of the MetH expression in B12 replete cultures. Cellular MetH quotas were, on average, 4.37 x 10-9 femtomoles per cell under B12 replete conditions and decreased in B12-deprived cultures, but not significantly (p = 0.40; Figure 3.5b). However, MetE abundance did vary significantly, and was starkly reduced in the presence of B12 to an average abundance of 1.95 x 10-8 femtomoles per cell (p < 0.01; Figure 3.5c). 

 
Figure 3.5: Protein measurements from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12.  a) Total cellular protein content (µg cell-1) b) Femtomoles of diagnostic MetH (KJ866915.1) peptide cell-1 and b) Femtomoles of diagnostic MetE (KJ866917.1). Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values of 3 biological replicates per treatment and triplicate injections. Color represents B12 treatment, with B12-replete (+) in navy and B12-deplete (-) in green. 

3.4.3 Metabolite Measurements – Out of the 25 compounds we sought to monitor, we were able to provide relative quantification for 8 compounds and absolute quantification for an additional 8 (Supporting Information, Table S3.2). The amino acids methionine and homocysteine were below the limit of detection in most of our samples.  We found that F. cylindrus took up a mean of 0.30 ± 0.16 attomoles of B12 per cell, with the majority of the cellular B12 quota being attributed to hydroxocobalamin (Figure 3.6; Table 3.1). All B12 replete samples contained trace or quantifiable amounts of adenosyl- and methylcobalamin.  Trace amounts of adenosylcobalamin were also identified in one B12 deplete replicate (Supporting Information, Figure S3.7). All cyanocobalamin measurements in the samples were below our calculated limit of detection (Supporting Information, Figure S3.7).


 
Figure 3.6: B12 quotas from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12 shown in a) attomoles cell-1 b) Nanomoles mole C-1. Color represents B12 analog, which include adenosylcobalamin (Ado-B12, pink), methylcobalamin (Me-B12, green), and hydroxocobalamin (OH-B12, orange). The mean of triplicate injections for three biological replicates per B12 treatment (+ and -) are shown. A star indicates that trace quantities of an analog were detected in a sample but was below the LOQ. Cyanocobalamin was not detected in any sample. 



Measurements of the osmolytes GBT and DMSP yielded relative quantification. GBT levels remained constant with B12 treatment (Figure 3.7a; p = 0.22). In contrast, DMSP concentration significantly increased with B12 deprivation (Figure 3.7b; p < 0.05). Another major osmolyte in F. cylindrus, proline, was also monitored and did not change significantly (Supporting Information Table S3.2). 
 
Figure 3.7: Metabolite measurements from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12. a) Normalized GBT (Glycine betaine) peak area cell-1 and b) Normalized DMSP peak area cell-1. Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values of 3 biological replicates per treatment and triplicate injections. Color represents B12 treatment, with navy boxes representing B12-replete treatments and green boxes representing B12-deplete treatments.

SAH levels increased with B12 deprivation, but this change was not found to be statistically significant (Figure 3.8a; p = 0.23). SAM levels appeared to be approximately the same between B12 treatments and did not change significantly (Figure 3.8b; p = 0.22). The ratio of SAH:SAM was also found to increase with B12 deprivation (Figure 3.8c).  


  
Figure 3.8: Metabolite measurements from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12. a) Attomoles of SAH (S-Adenosyl Homocysteine) cell-1 and b) Attomoles of SAM (S-Adenosyl Methionine) cell-1 c) Ratio of cellular SAH:SAM content. Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values of 3 biological replicates per treatment and triplicate injections. Color represents B12 treatment, with navy boxes representing B12-replete treatments and green boxes representing B12-deplete treatments.
 
Vitamin B1 quotas did not change significantly with vitamin B12 treatment and were 4.40 ± 1.98 attomoles cell-1 on average (Figure 3.9a; p = 0.376). The vitamin B1 biosynthesis precursors, cHET and HMP, were also monitored. Cellular cHET content increased significantly with B12 deprivation (Figure 3.9b; p < 0.05). There were also trace amounts of HMP detected, but only in B12 -replete samples. All HMP measurements were below the detection limit in B12 deprived samples. 

 	
Figure 3.9: Metabolite measurements from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C, with and without the addition of exogenous B12 a) Normalized peak area of Vitamin B1 (thiamine) cell-1 b) Attomoles of cHET (5-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-methyl-1,3-thiazole-2-carboxylic acid) cell-1. Boxes show IQR (interquartile range), with horizontal lines denoting the median and vertical lines showing minimum and maximum values of 3 biological replicates per treatment triplicate injections. Color represents B12 treatment, with navy boxes representing B12-replete treatments and green boxes representing B12-deplete treatments.


 
3.5 Discussion
	
3.5.1 Physiological parameters – Broadly, physiological parameters in F. cylindrus were not affected by vitamin B12 deprivation, with the exception of size (Table 3.1). Cellular C:N ratios content was found to be lower than Redfield, but comparable to previous measurements made in F. cylindrus cultures (Mills et al., 2010; Alderkamp et al., 2012) and the range of variation observed for a single species under identical culture and analysis conditions in other microalgae (Geider & LaRoche 2002). Cell size increased with B12 deprivation, which could have been fueled by swelling driven by increases in osmolyte content, notably DMSP (Figure 3.7; Stefels 2000).

3.5.2 Methionine Synthase Measurements –  Observations of the two methionine synthase enzymes, MetH and MetE, were comparable to those in Chapter II from F. cylindrus cultures grown at 4 °C and previous studies (Figure 3.10; Bertrand et al., 2013). Comparisons between methionine synthase expressions in F. cylindrus and P. tricornutum suggest that F. cylindrus may maintain a higher baseline expression of MetH to cope with reduced catalysis rates of the enzyme at colder temperatures. At maximal expression, F. cylindrus cultures grown at 6 °C produce 298 times more MetH than P. tricornutum (Fig. 3.10). In contrast, they only produce 18 times more MetE (Figure 3.10). It is possible that MetH works less efficiently at low temperatures, resulting in overexpression of the enzyme in psychrophilic species and leading to reduced disparity between the effects of utilization of the B12-dependent methionine pathway via MetH compared to the B12-independent pathway via MetE. Further supporting this hypothesis, environmental samples collected in strongly diatom dominated communities in Antarctic waters (McMurdo Sound) showed less of a disparity compared to our measurements, with MetH expression being about 26 times higher in F. cylindrus (Figure 3.10; Bertrand et al., 2013). The MetE signal is more difficult to compare as B12 concentrations were not measured at the time of sampling in  Bertrand et al., 2013. The MetE peptide which was used was also less specific to diatoms, so there may be an additional signal from bacterial and fungal MetE (Bertrand et al., 2013). The catalysis rate of MetH and MetE at temperatures of 37 °C and higher has been measured in E. coli (Grabowski et al., 2012), but not at lower temperatures to our knowledge. Notably, increased baseline expression of critical enzymes has been proposed as an adaptation to address reduced reaction rates at cold temperatures in psychrophiles (Collins & Margesin 2019). The high MetH abundance in F. cylindrus and polar diatom dominated communities (Bertrand et al., 2013; Figure 3.10) compared to the mesophile P. tricornutum illustrates the selective pressure to maintain methionine synthesis in Southern Ocean diatoms. The Southern ocean’s environment, including low populations of producers and high levels of UV radiation leading to degradation, make vitamin B12 scarce (Bertrand et al., 2011; Cruzen 1992 as cited in Bertrand et al., 2007). Overexpression of MetH may mean that the enzyme has an increased chance of encountering a co-factor in the cell at low intracellular B12 concentrations. The selective pressure for methionine production despite B12 deprivation the Southern Ocean is also illustrated by findings in Ellis et al., 2017, which demonstrated that a higher proportion of Southern Ocean diatom have genes for the biosynthesis of MetE than diatoms from other regions. 

  
Figure 3.10: Measurements (femtomoles µg total protein-1) of diagnostic MetH (blue) and MetE (yellow) peptide in F. cylindrus in this study, compared to measurements from P. tricornutum and environmental samples collected in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica in Bertrand et al., 2013. B12 treatment is represented by shape, with circles denoting B12-replete cultures and triangles B12-deplete cultures. Environmental measurements taken in situ are shown as squares.  

3.5.3 Cobalamin quotas – Mean B12 quotas in F. cylindrus (315.27 nmol mol C-1) were comparable to measurements of cobalamin in T. pseudonana (800 ± 85 nmol mol C-1) presented in Heal et al., 2019. Additionally, experiments which measured B12 quotas in sea ice algae with a >90% diatom makeup, also demonstrated comparable values, with a mean of 550 nmol mol C-1 of cobalamin (Taylor & Sullivan 2008). Trace amounts of adenosylcobalamin were detected in B12-deplete sample “e” (Supporting Information,  Figure S3.7). However, this trend was not consistent throughout replicate injections (Supporting Information, Figure S3.7). It is possible that this compound was still present in samples without the addition of exogenous B12 due to carryover from when the culture was initially inoculated. Another explanation is that there is analytical carryover between injections due to analytes remaining on the column. In the future, an increased number of blank injections should be run between samples to further explore this. Molar B12 to MetH ratios were much higher in F. cylindrus than expected (Table 3.1). There were six orders of magnitude more total available molecules of B12 and five more of solely methylcobalamin than could be used in MetH (Table 3.1). Mechanisms of B12 storage in diatoms have not been explored, but this result suggests luxury uptake and storage in the cell, and/or cryptic uses for B12 which have yet to be identified. 
A rough estimation of uptake rate by F. cylindrus was calculated using the formula for specific uptake rate (0.048 attomoles d-1 cell-1; Droop 1973). Considering published F. cylindrus cell densities in the Wendell Sea ice edge zone during late austral summer/early austral autumn, which were found to be 5.28 x 109 cells m-2, integrated over the first 150 meters of water (Kang & Fryxell 1993), 1.7 x 106 attomoles L-1 d-1 would be taken up by F. cylindrus cells. Although B12 production rates in the SO remain largely unexplored, we can provide context for this rate by comparing it the few measurements of ambient dissolved B12. Heal and colleagues’ work suggests that the upper estimates of total dissolved B12 was 7 pM in Puget Sound, Washington (mostly composed of hydroxo- and adocobalamin; 5.8 and 1.2 pM, respectively; Heal et al., 2014). In the case of a pulse of B12 at this concentration, an F. cylindrus community of the aforementioned size could take up all of the available B12 within 5.76 hours. This small timescale suggests that dense blooms of F. cylindrus may be capable of quickly taking up the majority of available B12 in the Southern Ocean, illustrating the disparity between B12 availability and B12 demands in the Southern Ocean. However, this value may be an underestimation as SO B12 availability is expected to be less than values in Heal et al., 2014 due absence of cyanobacteria and otherwise small populations of heterotrophic bacterial producers (Bertrand et al., 2007). 
3.5.4 Other Metabolic Effects – We were unable to detect the amino acids methionine and homocysteine in our samples. Targeted MS metabolite methods like ours tend to be biased against small polar molecules such as amino acids (Johnson et al., 2017).  The abundance of most metabolites examined here (SAM, SAH, B1, GBT, Proline) did not change with B12 deprivation. However, contrary to original hypotheses, DMSP content increased in B12-deprived cultures rather than decreased, as was observed by Heal et al., 2019. Heal and colleagues hypothesized that the decrease in DMSP production in T. pseudonana in B12-deplete condition was driven by methionine deprivation. DMSP production in many eukaryotes is known to be catalyzed by DYSB enzymes which facilitate SAM-dependent MMT (methylthiohydroxybutryate methyltransferases) reactions (Curson et al., 2018). In F. cylindrus, we did not observe significant changes to SAM content, which may explain the absence of a decrease in DMSP production. DMSP is a precursor to DMS, which is a key player in the sulfur cycle, in addition to its climactic importance as a cloud forming nucleus (Charlson et al., 1987). Additionally, DMSP is hypothesized to be a significant carbon and sulfur source for bacteria in some environments (Kiene et al., 2000). Studies place pennate diatoms such as Fragilariopsis spp. among significant DMSP producers in the SO (Sheehan et al., 2020). Increases in DMSP production in F. cylindrus due to B12 deprivation could potentially increase dissolved DMSP concentrations in the Southern Ocean via senescence-driven release during bloom termination. This increase in DMSP could fuel bacterial growth, accelerating the microbial loop and decreasing carbon export. Furthermore, there is potential for a negative feedback loop between B12 deprivation and production via DMSP exchange, as heterotrophic bacteria and chemoautotrophic archaea are known to be the main cobalamin producers in the absence of cyanobacteria in the Antarctic waters (Doxey et al., 2015). This increase in DMSP production should be further explored, with emphasis on improving our method for quantification of this compound in order to present absolute DMSP quotas in the presence and absence of vitamin B12. 
The abundance of cHET, which is a precursor for de novo synthesis of vitamin B1, also increased with B12 deprivation. It has been postulated that vitamin B1 biosynthesis and B12 availability may be linked due to connections related to sulfur metabolism. cHET has been observed to be used in place of vitamin B1 by microalgal eukaryotes when provided with HMP, another precursor to vitamin B1 biosynthesis (Paerl et al., 2018). HMP was found in trace concentration in B12-replete samples and not detected in B12-deprived samples. Bertrand et al., 2012 found that the thiamine biosynthesis protein ThiC was more abundant in response to B12 deprivation and postulated whether it might be activated in response to SAM starvation. The changing balance in the abundance of these two vitamin B1 precursors, despite absence of SAM starvation, implies that there may be an upstream control to their dynamics that may not regulated be directly regulated by SAM, but rather B12 availability, warranting further investigation.

3.5.5 Conclusions – Our results provide baseline physiological information about cold-adapted diatom’s responses to vitamin B12 deprivation. We postulate that F. cylindrus’ physiological parameters are not as firmly regulated by the availability of the vitamin as organisms that display decreases to growth rate under B12 scarcity such as T. pseudonana (without MetE) and P. tricornutum (with MetE) (Heal et al., 2019; Bertrand et al., 2012). The disparity between the effects of utilizing B12-dependent methionine synthesis as compared to the B12-independent pathway may be smaller in F. cylindrus due to a decreased functionality of the MetH enzyme at low temperatures, as evidenced by increased MetH quotas compared to P. tricornutum and the difference in the magnitude of MetE and MetH responses (Figure 3.10). The maximal difference in MetE abundance changes in F. cylindrus was much less than that of MetH, emphasizing the difference in cost of use between the two enzymes. Furthermore, F. cylindrus B12 quotas were also much higher than could be used in MetH at a time suggesting luxury uptake and storage and/or use in unidentified B12-requiring enzymes. Lastly, the change in abundance of metabolites, including DMSP and cHET, highlight that growth rate should not be considered the sole method for assessing the impact of nutrient deprivation in marine phytoplankton. In this study, the effects of B12 scarcity catalyzed changes that may have putative impacts to F. cylindrus’ role in its wider community via the potential synthesis and differential production of growth stimulating and climatically significant compounds. 
 
Chapter IV: Conclusions

Overview – This dissertation aimed to characterize the molecular consequences of B12 deprivation in an ecologically significant polar diatom. Chapter II investigated the interactive proteomic responses of B12 and elevated temperature. In this chapter, I found that proteomic biomarkers typically used to survey vitamin B12 limitation in situ are reliable for F. cylindrus, even at lethal temperatures.  Furthermore, I identified a host of proteins differentially expressed in response to the combined stressors. Lastly, there were hints of a putative B12 remodelling pathway in this diatom, which warrants additional investigation. Chapter III examined the effects of vitamin B12 deprivation on diatom physiology and metabolite production, in addition to presenting the first direct measurements of cellular B12 quotas in Fragilariopsis cylindrus. We observed that F. cylindrus took up more B12 than could be used in MetH, which appears to be the main B12-requiring enzymes in eukaryotes, suggesting luxury uptake, and raising questions regarding the existence of additional cryptic B12-utilizing enzymes. We also noted the increased production of DMSP and thiamine related compounds in B12 deprived cultures. Changes to DMSP production are particularly intriguing and suggest that F. cylindrus may stimulate bacterial growth in the absence of B12.
Recommended Future Works – There are a few experiments which could be conducted in order to expand on the research presented here. In Chapter II, we tested to see if F. cylindrus experiences B12-mediated heat resistance, as was presented in C. reinhardtii by Xie et al., 2013. We determined that B12 did not confer heat stress tolerance in F. cylindrus, but were not able to propose a mechanism for the difference in responses. MetE transcripts declined in C. reinhardtii at lethal temperatures. In contrast, we were able to detect the protein in F. cylindrus after exposure to lethal temperatures. However, it is possible we detected MetE peptides after transcripts had already decreased in F. cylindrus. In order to elucidate the reason for the difference in responses between F. cylindrus and C. reinhardtii, a time series experiment should be conducted with protein and transcript measurements in both organisms. The difference in activity of F. cylindrus and C. reinhardtii MetH and MetE should also be compared at a range of temperatures. Chapter II also presented possible evidence that F. cylindrus may be able to remodel degraded cobalamin molecules with a chimeric Co-chelatase. F. cylindrus’ ability to utilize portions of degraded cobalamin molecules and DMB should be explored using multifactorial experiments in a -MetE mutant.
In Chapter III, it was postulated that F. cylindrus maintains a high baseline MetH expression compared to P. tricornutum due to decreased methionine synthesis capacity at low temperatures. The catalysis rate of MetH and MetE at temperatures of 37 °C and higher has been measured in E. coli (Grabowski et al., 2012), but not at lower temperatures to our knowledge. The activity of these enzymes at temperatures between -2 °C and 37 °C should be quantified in order to continue to examine this hypothesis in the context of psychrophiles.  Lastly, the quotas of major osmolytes in F. cylindrus (DMSP, proline, and GBT, and homarine; Boroujerdi et al., 2012) under vitamin B12 deprivation should be quantified. We were able to provide relative quantification of DMSP between treatments for our samples, but absolute quantification would allow for calculations of carbon and sulfur availability to heterotrophic bacteria from lysed F. cylindrus cells. For these measurements, our MS method can be altered to facilitate better quantification of these metabolites. 

Implications & Significance – As researchers studying microbial ecophysiology, we attempt to make assertations about the nature of organism function under varying environmental conditions. This is conducted in careful, controlled environments, and in the case of these experiments and many others, with a single organism in isolation. Additionally, changes to growth rate have been historically considered the prominent method for assessing nutrient limitation. However, these idealized conditions and narrow scope fail to capture the notion that microbial eukaryotes like F. cylindrus inhabit complex and diverse assemblages that freely exchange compounds for energy, signalling, and a variety of other purposes. Thereby, any response to an environmental variable has the possibility to impact others in the community, leading to cascading consequences. We still possess only a shallow understanding of the granularity required to address the consequences of micronutrient limitation on microbial interactions (Worden et al., 2015). This research, along with other proteomic and metabolomic studies both in culture and in situ, contributes information that begins to allow us to unravel the mystery of microbial function and interactions in the face of stressors like vitamin B12 deprivation.  
 
